(A)  Modeling perturbation effects at single-cell resolution requires disentangling biological signals from confounding variation introduced by noise, batch effects, and heterogeneity across similarly treated cells.  (B)  S tate  is a multi-scale machine learning architecture that operates across genes, individual cells, and cell populations. The core State Transition model (ST) learns perturbation effects by training on sets of perturbed and unperturbed cell populations grouped by shared covariates (e.g., perturbation type, cell context, and batch). ST can operate directly on gene expression profiles or on compact cell representations from the State Embedding model (SE), which learns information-rich embeddings from large-scale observational data. This multi-scale architecture allows ST to effectively simulate perturbation experiments  in silico  and support downstream analyses such as expression quantification, differential gene expression analysis, and estimation of perturbation effect sizes.  (C)  ST is a transformer model that takes sets of unperturbed cell populations and perturbation labels as input to predict corresponding perturbed cell populations. When using gene expression profiles to represent cells, ST directly predicts transcriptomes at single-cell resolution. When using State embedding inputs, ST predicts output embeddings that are then decoded with an MLP to predict transcriptomes.  (D)  Increasing the size of cell sets improves validation loss up to an optimal point, with best performance on the Tahoe-100M dataset achieved when covariate-matched groups are chunked into sets of 256 cells. The full ST model significantly outperforms a pseudobulk model (S tate  with mean-pooling instead of self-attention) and a single-cell variant (S tate  with set size = 1). Removing the self-attention mechanism (S tate  w/o self-attention) substantially degrades performance, highlighting the importance of modeling interactions between cells within a set.

The challenge of modeling biological heterogeneity is driven by an inherent limitation of single-cell RNA sequencing: the destruction of cells during measurement prevents observation of their pre-perturbation states and accurate inference of each cell’s specific perturbation response. To address this, perturbation effects are inferred by comparing populations of perturbed and unperturbed cells, while attempting to resolve heterogeneity at the level of cell type, batch, or other population-level covariates. Some approaches assume that within-population heterogeneity is negligible compared to perturbation effects and simply map perturbed cells to randomly selected unperturbed cells with shared covariates ( Roohani et al., 2024a ), a mapping approach that has also been tested with expressive transformer-based models ( Cui et al., 2024 ;  Hao et al., 2024 ). Although effective in datasets where perturbation effects are strong ( Norman et al., 2019 ), these approaches often fail to generalize when perturbation effects are more subtle and heterogeneity in the unperturbed population may even exceed the perturbation signal. This is particularly evident in cases of variation in cell cycle state, lineage bias, or pre-existing epigenetic programs and even more so when the basal population is itself drawn from diverse cell types such as in  in vivo  studies ( Lara-Astiaso et al., 2023 ;  Saunders et al., 2024 ). Other models treat cell populations as distributions, employing generative approaches like variational autoencoders to learn data-generating distributions or explicitly disentangle labeled and unlabeled sources of variation ( Lotfollahi et al., 2023 ;  Piran et al., 2024 ;  Bereket and Karaletsos, 2024 ;  Weinberger et al., 2023 ;  Lopez et al., 2023 ;  Papalexi et al., 2021 ;  Weinberger et al., 2024 ;  Lopez et al., 2018 ;  Song et al., 2025 ). However, in practice, these models often fail to meaningfully outperform methods that do not explicitly model distributional structure when applied to the prediction of perturbation effects ( Wu et al., 2024 ). Optimal transport-based methods that map unperturbed to perturbed populations have also been proposed, but their applicability has been limited by strong assumptions and poor scalability ( Bunne et al., 2023 ,  2024b ;  Jiang et al., 2024 ; R yu et al., 2024 ).

Across all metrics and data scales spanning multiple orders of magnitude, S tate  consistently outperforms both naive and state-of-the-art models. To our knowledge, it is the first model to consistently outperform simple linear baselines in generalizing perturbation effects across cellular contexts. Moreover, we show that modeling perturbations in lower data regimes with the S tate  embedding enables the detection of strong responses in novel cell types, when no perturbation data for those cell types are used during training. For example, we demonstrate that pretraining S tate  on the Tahoe-100M dataset ( Zhang et al., 2025 ) improves the generalization of perturbation effects to unseen cellular contexts. Thus, S tate  presents a scalable approach for learning perturbation effects that transfer across datasets and experimental settings.

Beyond empirical performance, we provide novel theoretical results that connect S tate  to Optimal Transport (OT) theory, a commonly used method for modeling cellular heterogeneity in response to perturbations ( Bunne et al., 2023 ;  Chen et al., 2024 ;  Demir et al., 2024 ;  Dong et al., 2023 ;  Bunne et al., 2024b ; R yu et al., 2024 ;  Jiang et al., 2024 ). Specifically, we prove that, under mild regularity conditions and in an asymptotic limit, the unique continuous OT map between unperturbed and perturbed cell populations lies within the solution family of S tate . This result positions S tate  as a generalization of OT-based approaches: while it can recover the classical OT solution, it also allows for more flexible modeling of perturbation effects that may not adhere to the assumptions and constraints imposed by standard OT formulations.

The core motivation for ST is to model cellular heterogeneity beyond known covariates, such as cell type and perturbation label, to improve perturbation response prediction. To achieve this, cells are first stratified by known covariates ( Fig. S1 ). For each covariate-matched perturbed group, ST constructs non-disjoint cell sets of fixed size, which serve as input during training and are paired with unperturbed control cell sets of equal size and matched covariates. Conditioned on the perturbation, ST uses a transformer backbone to perform repeated bidirectional self-attention and feed-forward operations across control cell sets ( Section 4.3 ,  Fig. S2A ). This enables ST to model heterogeneity within the input cell set while predicting downstream transcriptomic responses to perturbation ( Fig. 1C ).

We tested the S tate  architecture on a generalization task assessing its ability to predict perturbation effects in new cellular contexts, such as unseen cell lines or donors. Specifically, we implemented an underrepresented context generalization task ( Section 4.2.1 ), in which each model had access to 30% of perturbations in the test context during training ( Fig. 2A ). We benchmarked performance against several baselines ( Section 4.7.5 ), including a simple linear model ( Ahlmann-Eltze et al., 2024 ), two autoencoder-based models CPA ( Lotfollahi et al., 2023 ) and scVI ( Lopez et al., 2018 ), and a single cell foundation model scGPT ( Cui et al., 2024 ). We also included two naive mean-based baselines that explain a significant portion of observed variance in cell-type generalization tasks ( Fig. 2A ). The “context mean” baseline predicts the average expression observed in the training data for a given cell context across all perturbations ( Kernfeld et al., 2023 ), while the “perturbation mean” baseline predicts the average perturbation effect across training cell contexts applied to the basal expression for a given cell context. In our results, we refer to baselines predicting mean expression or mean perturbation effect as “mean baselines” and the other models as “baseline models”. All models (including S tate ) were trained to predict the log-expression of the top 2,000 highly varying genes (HVGs), a commonly used feature space for baseline comparisons.

(A)  Underrepresented context generalization task. Models were trained on perturbation data from one or more cell contexts and evaluated on their ability to predict the effects of the same perturbations in a largely held-out and underrepresented target context. The “perturbation mean” baseline estimates effects by averaging observed differences between perturbed and control states across training cell contexts. The “context mean” baseline uses the average expression profile of the target cell context across all training perturbations.  (B)  Models were trained and evaluated on chemical, signaling, and genetic perturbation datasets ( Zhang et al., 2025 ;  Parse Biosciences, 2023 ;  Replogle et al., 2022 ;  Nadig et al., 2025 ). Training and test contexts were drawn from one dataset at a time. Comparisons included the mean baselines from (A), a simple linear model ( Ahlmann-Eltze et al., 2024 ), autoencoder-based models (scVI ( Lopez et al., 2018 ), CPA ( Lotfollahi et al., 2023 )), and a foundation model (scGPT ( Cui et al., 2024 )).  (C)  Performance was assessed using C ell -E val  metrics ( Section 4.7 ) on standard Perturb-Seq outputs: expression counts and differentially expressed (DE) genes, with the following highlighted:  (D)  Perturbation discrimination score, measured using inverse normalized rank.  (E)  Pearson correlation between predicted and observed change in post-perturbation log-normalized expression counts.  (F)  Area under the Precision-Recall curve for model predictions of DE genes.  (G)  Precision-Recall curves for model predictions of DE genes.  (H)  Spearman correlation of log fold changes for significant DE genes between predictions and true values.  (I)  Overlap in top DE genes, defined as the percentage of significant genes in observed data that were also predicted as significant in predictions.  (J)  Spearman correlation between predicted and true overall perturbation effect size.  (K)  Confusion matrix comparing predicted and observed perturbation effect sizes, measured by the number of differentially expressed genes per perturbation.

We evaluated S tate  on chemical perturbation data from the  Tahoe-100M  dataset ( Zhang et al., 2025 ), cytokine signaling perturbations from Parse Biosciences ( Parse Biosciences, 2023 ) (abbreviated Parse-PBMC), and genetic perturbation data from  Replogle et al. (2022)  and  Nadig et al. (2025)  (abbreviated Replogle-Nadig)( Fig. 2B ). Tahoe-100M includes perturbation responses from 50 diverse cancer cell lines treated under 1,138 conditions involving 380 distinct drug perturbations. Parse-PBMC contains 90 cytokine perturbation responses across 12 donors and 18 cell types. Replogle-Nadig consists of 2,024 genetic perturbations applied to four distinct cell lines after filtering perturbations with low on-target efficacy. For all datasets, we trained S tate  directly on cell representations derived from highly variable genes (ST+HVG). Training and test contexts were drawn only from one dataset at a time.

To test generalization, we implemented a careful data splitting strategy: for the Tahoe100M dataset, we plotted a PCA using pseudobulked expression values for the fifty available cell lines to visually identify distinct phenotypic clusters. From these, five cell lines were chosen to be in the test set for final model evaluation ( Fig. S3 ). No data from these cell lines was observed throughout the model development process. In a separate evaluation, we iteratively held out all cells from 11 distinct organs for testing. For the Parse-PBMC dataset, we held out 4 random donors from the 12 donor cell lines. For each of these held-out contexts, 30% of its perturbations were randomly removed from the test data and included in the respective training data. For the Replogle-Nadig dataset, we conducted an evaluation by iteratively holding out one cell line as a test set. For each iteration, models were trained on the remaining three cell lines plus an additional 30% of perturbations randomly sampled from the test cell line.

Our evaluation framework captures key outputs of a single-cell perturbation experiment which are well represented through three readout categories: (1) gene expression counts, (2) differential expression (DE) statistics, including identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and their log fold changes, and (3) the magnitude of the perturbation effect (e.g., the total number of DEGs) ( Fig. 2B ). To comprehensively assess model performance across these dimensions, we developed a suite of evaluation metrics, Cell-Eval ( Section 4.7 ,  Fig. 2C ). These metrics are designed to be both expressive and biologically interpretable, offering complementary insights. For example, while overlap in DEGs helps link predictions to specific pathways giving them biological significance, it may be less sensitive to fine-grained changes compared to the perturbation discrimination score, which captures the similarity between predicted and true perturbation effects. Moreover, by benchmarking against naive baselines, these metrics provide a clearer assessment on generalization performance versus memorization of training-set effects.

A central goal of perturbation experiments is to identify perturbations that optimally drive desired transcriptomic states. For a model to do this, it must be able to effectively distinguish between different perturbation effects. Using a variant of the perturbation discrimination score adapted from  Wu et al. (2024) , which ranks predicted post-perturbation expression profiles by their similarity to the true perturbation outcomes, S tate  achieved an absolute improvement of 54% and 29% on the Tahoe-100M and PBMC datasets respectively ( Fig. 2D ). On genetic perturbation datasets, S tate  matched the performance of the perturbation mean baseline and significantly outperforms all other baseline models.

To directly assess the accuracy of predicted gene expression counts, we computed the Pearson correlation between observed and predicted perturbation-induced expression changes. On this metric, S tate  outperformed baselines by 63% on Tahoe-100M, 47% on Parse-PBMC and 5% on Replogle-Nadig. For the genetic perturbation dataset, this task is more challenging due to the subtler effects of perturbations. Notably, on this dataset, the best-performing baseline with performance comparable to S tate  was the context mean rather than the perturbation mean. This highlights that S tate ’s predictions were not trivially similar to either mean baseline ( Fig. 2E ).

For evaluating log fold change, we limited our analysis to true significant DE genes to limit confounding from predicted significance levels. The Spearman correlation was computed between the predicted and true log fold changes for each of these genes. Some machine learning baselines such as scVI showed strong performance on this metric, yet S tate ’s performance was still over 10% higher than baselines for both Tahoe-100M and Parse-PBMC datasets ( Fig. 2H ). To simulate a practical DE analysis workflow, we selected DE genes using an FDR threshold of 0.05 applied to model-predicted p-values, then ranked this set by log fold change and compared it to the equivalent set derived from true p-values and fold changes. Using different setting of overlap size ( k  = 50, 100, 200), we observe strong performance by S tate  across all three datasets and all three settings of  k  ( Fig. S5A ). For completeness, we also evaluated the model on a variable sized overlap by setting  k  to be the same size as the number of true differentially expressed genes. S tate  is twice as good as the next base baseline (scGPT) on the Tahoe-100M dataset and 43% better than the corresponding best baseline (Linear) on the Parse-PBMC dataset ( Fig. 2I ). To assess a more practically relevant scenario of minimizing false positives, we also measured the proportion of predicted top  k  DE genes that were significant at all in the observed experimental data (precision at  k ). Across datasets and settings of  k , S tate  showed much stronger performance than baselines ( Fig. S5B ).

Moving beyond identification of individual DE genes, we assessed the accuracy of models in predicting overall perturbation effects by counting the total number of DE genes predicted for each perturbation. S tate  accurately ranked perturbations by their relative effect sizes, achieving Spearman correlations 53% higher on Parse-PBMC and 22% higher than baselines on Replogle-Nadig, and 70% higher on Tahoe-100M approaching an absolute correlation of 0.8 ( Fig. 2J ). Looking at the trend across individual perturbations, we observe that S tate  can predict perturbation effects across both datasets with large effect sizes (i.e. drug perturbations in Tahoe-100M) as well as those with subtler magnitude of effects, such as the genetic perturbation dataset Replogle-Nadig ( Fig. 2K ). These results suggest that even when the specific genes predicted to be differentially expressed after genetic perturbation do not always match those observed experimentally ( Fig. 2I ), S tate  can still accurately estimate the overall size of the DE gene set. Moreover, because the set of experimentally observed DE genes may be influenced by experiment-specific factors, and because overlap-based metrics can be overly stringent for perturbations with subtle effects, the size of the DE gene set offers a more robust and complementary indicator of model performance in genetic perturbation experiments, even though it is less directly interpretable.

Finally, to evaluate generalization under a more challenging data split, we assessed performance on a held-out tissue. In this setting, S tate  was trained on data from all tissues except one, and evaluated on the held-out tissue. Across multiple metrics, S tate  consistently outperformed the perturbation mean baseline ( Fig. S6 ).

While S tate  consistently outperformed all baseline models across datasets with few exceptions, the performance gains over mean baselines were notably larger on Tahoe-100M, which includes 100 million cells spanning thousands of perturbations across dozens of baseline cellular contexts, and Parse-PBMC, which includes 10 million cells across 12 donors and 18 cell types, as compared to the genome-scale genetic perturbation datasets conducted in just a few cell lines. This highlights S tate ’s ability to leverage data scale and context diversity more effectively than existing models, which do not display proportionate gains in performance despite more data. Moreover, even in the case of the genetic perturbation dataset, where some baselines showed occasional benefit over S tate  on certain metrics (Linear model outperformed on DE overlap by 20% and the context mean baseline outperformed on fold change prediction by 12%), these models were unable to consistently outperform across multiple metrics. In contrast, S tate  demonstrated the most consistent performance overall.

(A)  The State Embedding model (SE) learns rich, generalizable representations of transcriptomic information across diverse datasets. Given a control (unperturbed) cell population, SE computes cell embeddings. ST then predicts how those embeddings shift in response to a specified perturbation, effectively modeling the distributional effect of the perturbation in latent space. Finally, a learnt decoder maps the predicted embeddings back into gene expression space.  (B)  Understanding the impact of a shared latent space across datasets for modeling perturbation effects across diverse cell contexts and perturbations.  (C)  Embedding quality is evaluated using both intrinsic and extrinsic metrics: intrinsic performance reflects classification accuracy of perturbed cells in the embedding generated using observed data; extrinsic performance measures the classification accuracy over perturbed embeddings predicted by ST trained on the cell embeddings.  (D)  Over two held-out perturbation datasets, using the intrinsic and extrinsic metrics, we evaluate State embeddings against cell embeddings generated by scFoundation ( Hao et al., 2024 ), scGPT ( Cui et al., 2024 ), Universal Cell Embedding (UCE) ( Rosen et al., 2023 ), and Transcriptformer (TF) ( Pearce et al., 2025 ). State embeddings consistently outperform comparable model embeddings, even passing the performance achieved using the original expression counts.  (E)  State embeddings enhance prediction of perturbation effects zero-shot, e.g. in novel cell contexts not seen perturbed at the time of training.  (F)  ST with State embeddings is pretrained using Tahoe-100M and fine-tuned using a query dataset consisting of one or more contexts, of which one is held out for zero-shot testing. ST is evaluated without any training using perturbations in the held-out cell context ( Section 4.2.2 ).  (G)  Zero-shot performance in ranking perturbations by overall effect size in previously unseen cell contexts over 5 query datasets.  (H)  Zooming into Parse-PBMC, State embeddings also improve performance over other metrics from Cell-Eval. More datasets are shown in  Figure S7 .

Architecturally, the SE encoder is a dense, bidirectional transformer trained to predict log-normalized gene expression ( Section 4.4 ). The SE decoder is a smaller, specialized MLP that predicts gene expression from a combination of the learned cell embedding and the target gene embedding ( Fig. S2B ). This architectural asymmetry encourages the learning of generalizable representations of cell state in a single vector embedding. SE is trained with a loss computed along two axes: it predicts expression across genes within each cell, and for each gene across cells in each minibatch. This dual-axis formulation encourages the model to capture relative variation in gene expression both within individual cells and across the population ( Lal et al., 2024 ;  Ding et al., 2025 ;  Fischer et al., 2024 ). The loss enhances the model’s sensitivity to perturbation effects by preserving the inter-cellular variability necessary for accurate differential expression modeling.

By learning a general-purpose embedding that captures subtle cell-to-cell variation, SE addresses a core challenge in perturbation modeling: defining a transferable feature space across single-cell datasets ( Fig. 3B ). When SE and ST are used together, ST learns to predict perturbed cell embeddings, while simultaneously learning to decode those predicted embeddings to log expression space ( Fig. S2B ). To assess the quality of the embeddings produced by SE, we evaluated their ability to distinguish between perturbations. We measured intrinsic quality by testing how well the embeddings of observed cells cluster by perturbation label, and extrinsic quality by examining how well the predicted embeddings from ST preserve this separation ( Fig. 3C ). We compared SE against using gene expression counts directly, as well as cell embeddings generated by scFoundation ( Hao et al., 2024 ), scGPT ( Cui et al., 2024 ), Universal Cell Embedding (UCE) ( Rosen et al., 2023 ), and Transcript-former (TF) ( Pearce et al., 2025 ) across two held-out perturbation datasets not seen during SE training ( Srivatsan et al., 2020 ;  Replogle et al., 2022 ). To measure separability, we train a simple linear probe on the embeddings to predict the perturbation label called for that cell. State embeddings more effectively separated between perturbation phenotypes compared to all other foundation models and the original expression counts, surpassing even the performance achieved using the original data representation ( Fig. 3D ). This suggests that SE is, in some cases, capable of denoising Perturb-seq data. In the extrinsic evaluation, State embeddings also led to over a 6% absolute improvement in downstream perturbation classification accuracy compared to all baselines.

Projecting gene expression into a shared latent space also enables zero-shot identification of strong perturbation effects in new cell contexts (i.e., without explicit training in the new cell context) ( Fig. 3E ). We assessed the robustness of embeddings from SE by pretraining S tate  (ST+SE) on Tahoe-100M and fine-tuning the model on smaller datasets with new cell contexts, which we denote as  query datasets  ( Fig. 3F ). To evaluate the model, we held out one cell context at a time from the query datasets, thus focusing on zero-shot context-level generalization within a dataset rather than zero-shot dataset transfer. In predicting perturbation effects for previously unperturbed contexts, S tate  trained with the State embedding (ST+SE) consistently ranked perturbation by their effect sizes more accurately than both the perturbation mean baseline and S tate  models trained directly on gene expression (ST+HVG). This evaluation was performed using five datasets - which included two genetic perturbation datasets ( Jiang et al., 2025 ;  McFaline-Figueroa et al., 2024 ) and a drug perturbation dataset ( Srivatsan et al., 2020 ) in addition to datasets used for the previous analyses, producing a total of 2,102 perturbations ( Fig. 3G ) across 5 datasets and 40 cell contexts. For larger datasets like Parse-PBMC and Replogle-Nadig, using the State embedding achieved more than 17% improvement with an absolute Spearman correlation greater than 0.5. In smaller genetic perturbation datasets (e.g., McFaline et al. and Jiang et al.), where baseline performance was near zero, embeddings yielded several-fold improvements.

Dataset-specific processing and quality differences also affected other metrics. Notably, in datasets with strong perturbation effects, zero-shot improvements of using SE were consistent. For example, on the Parse-PBMC dataset, we saw an average of 15% improvement across all five metrics described in  Section 2.2  ( Fig. 3H ). When excluding cases where baseline HVG performance was below 10% (indicating noisy data), the fine-tuning improvements remained largely consistent across all 5 datasets tested ( Fig. S7 ). These results show SE’s capacity for transferring learning across datasets where technical variation can confound the biological signal driven by perturbation. ST+SE model performance also consistently benefited from pre-training even for datasets without drug-based perturbations (e.g. genetic or signaling perturbations), highlighting the successful transfer of cell regulatory information across perturbation modalities ( Fig. S8 ).

To illustrate a practical application of S tate , we evaluated its ability to detect cell type-specific differential expression ( Fig. 4A ). This analysis focused on five held-out cell lines from the Tahoe-100M dataset ( Fig. 4A ). We identified perturbations with strong cell type specificity by comparing the overlap of DE genes and the Spearman correlation of log fold changes between S tate ’s predictions and two baselines: the context mean and the perturbation mean. Improved performance relative to the perturbation mean baseline suggests that S tate  learns perturbation effects that are specific to a given cell type. Similarly, gains over the context mean baseline indicate that the model can distinguish between different perturbations within the same cell line and is not trivially predicting the average expression for each cell line. Across perturbations, S tate  consistently displayed superior ability to recover the true ranking of log fold changes for differentially expressed genes, outperforming both the context mean and perturbation mean baselines ( Fig. 4B, C ).

(A)  Application of S tate  for identifying perturbations with cell type-specific effects.  (B)  DE Gene Overlap between predicted and observed perturbation effects.  (C)  Spearman correlation between predicted versus observed log fold changes for differentially expressed (DE). For  (B)  and  (C)  Left: comparison between S tate  and the context mean baseline. Right: comparison with the perturbation mean baseline. A specific held-out perturbation (Trametinib, 0.05 µM) shows substantially higher correlation for S tate  relative to both baselines, indicating detection of perturbation effects that are both cell type specific but also not trivially predicted by the cell type mean.  (D)  Predicted versus observed significance values for DE genes following Trametinib (0.05 µM) perturbation, across the top 2,000 highly variable genes. S tate  (blue) shows closer alignment with ground truth than baselines (yellow). Log fold changes for observed significant DE genes following Trametinib (0.05 µM) perturbation, comparing predictions from S tate  (blue) and baselines (yellow).  (F)  Detection of cell type-specific DE genes across 5 cell lines following Trametinib (0.05 µM) perturbation. The top row for each cell line corresponds to the top 100 genes with the highest log fold change. Lower rows show the same set as predicted by S tate  and baseline models. For each model, we also report the overlap in predicted DEGs and true DEGs computed with the observed data  (G)  Perturbation similarity heatmap for drug-induced differential expression across all held out cell lines. Each perturbation (row or column) corresponds to a specific drug-concentration pair. Heatmap computed using experimentally measured data, S tate  predictions and perturbation mean baseline. Similarity of heatmaps to clustering in the measured data compared using Adjusted Rand Index.  (H)  S tate  outperforms baselines at predicting cell survival.

To further explore the cell-line specificity of perturbation response prediction, we compared S tate  predictions to perturbation and context mean baselines for all five cell held-out cell lines. For each cell line, we identified the top 100 significantly differentially expressed (DE) genes based on absolute log fold change in the ground truth, and compared them to the top 100 predicted by S tate , using its own predicted significance values and log fold changes as thresholds ( Fig. 4F ). In every case, S tate  correctly recovered over 30% of the top DE genes, while both baseline methods identified fewer than 7%. On average, S tate  correctly identified  ~  20 additional cell line-specific DE genes relative to the baselines. This performance gap is particularly striking given that the top 100 genes were largely distinct across cell lines, with only an average of 16 DE genes shared within the top 100 across any pair of cell lines. Notably, in cases where genes were shared, S tate  was also able to recover these shared effects, further supporting its ability to capture both unique and conserved perturbation responses across diverse cellular contexts.

To evaluate whether S tate  broadly captures patterns of perturbation similarity, we compared the drug-induced perturbation effects across all drugs in this dataset in different contexts. For each held-out drug-concentration pair, we used the log 2 -fold changes in gene expression across cell lines as a fingerprint of that perturbation’s effect. We then computed pairwise similarities between these fingerprints to construct a perturbation similarity map ( Fig. 4G ). Comparing these predicted similarities to ground truth revealed a clear improvement for S tate  over baseline models, achieving an Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) of over 0.7, compared to less than 0.1 for the perturbation mean baseline ( Fig. 4G ).

The central goal for S tate  is to reliably simulate single-cell perturbational experiments across diverse cell contexts. We used this objective to guide the design of a comprehensive model evaluation suite, Cell-Eval, focusing on performance along three key dimensions: gene expression counts, differential expression, perturbation effect sizes. To our knowledge, S tate  is the first machine learning model to consistently outperform simple baselines such as the mean or linear models on the cell context generalization task, across almost all metrics and on multiple datasets. Moreover, the inclusion of embeddings from our cell embedding model, SE, enables more effective zero-shot perturbation effect prediction in novel cell contexts, a core goal for developing truly generalizable virtual cells. While S tate  shows strong zero-shot performance when predicting perturbation effect sizes, metrics that reflect subtler changes, such as the accuracy of individual DE genes, are more sensitive to dataset size and quality. With the growth of large-scale perturbational atlases ( Rood et al., 2024 ;  Huang et al., 2025a ;  Zhang et al., 2025 ;  Rood et al., 2025 ), we expect performance on these subtler metrics to improve, and S tate  is well-positioned to leverage these datasets given its improved robustness to cellular and data variability. Furthermore, we have found that ST attention maps demonstrate sensitivity to cell set heterogeneity, highlighting interpretability as a promising avenue for further understanding gene regulatory mechanisms using S tate  ( Section 6 ).

When applied to previously seen contexts, we have found S tate ’s predictions are biologically meaningful, accurately capturing context-specific perturbation effects, such as cell-type specific DE genes. Predicted post-perturbation profiles were also found to capture non-transcriptional cellular phenotypes such as cell survival. These capabilities position S tate  as a step towards realizing the broader vision of a virtual cell–a model capable of exploring the space of possible cell states ( Bunne et al., 2024a ;  Noutahi et al., 2025 ) and guiding autonomous systems, such as AI agents, for experimental design ( Roohani et al., 2024b ;  Huang et al., 2025b ;  Rizvi et al., 2025 ;  Wu et al., 2025 ). S tate  contributes to this vision by advancing the state-of-the-art in perturbation-response modeling and by introducing an architecture that can meaningfully leverage the growing size and diversity of single-cell perturbation datasets. Its flexible transformer architecture can support a range of tasks that involve modeling transitions between distinct populations such as differentiation, development, and reprogramming. S tate  is also agnostic to the choice of cell representation, which enables seamless extension to additional data modalities, including proteomics and morphological measurements, as well as literature-based knowledge. By incorporating mechanisms for perturbation featurization withing S tate , we expect to further lower the barriers between different modalities such as drugs and gene knockdowns, while also opening the door to combinatorial perturbation prediction. Although S tate  has been trained and evaluated on over 70 cell contexts, we have not tested its usability on entirely held-out datasets for which no cell contexts have been seen during training. Further improvements in SE through training on larger datasets, such as scBaseCount ( Youngblut et al., 2025 ), will be instrumental in generalizing predictions across such diverse settings.

We assume that the observed log-normalized perturbed expression state of each cell,  X p , is a random variable generated from an  unobservable  unperturbed state,  X 0 , which itself is a random variable representing the cell’s underlying expression state.  X 0  is drawn from a basal cell distribution 𝒟 basal  for a given set of covariates (e.g., cell line, batch condition, etc), and the perturbation effect can be modeled as follows:
 

 
where

To evaluate the generalization capabilities of perturbation models, we first test the generalization of perturbation effects within Perturb-Seq datasets ( Fig. 2 ). Given the dataset of interest, let the collection of biological contexts (cell types or cell lines in some dataset) be 𝒞 and the perturbation catalogue be 𝒫. For every context  c ∈  𝒞, we write 𝒫 c   ⊆  𝒫 for the subset of perturbations that were profiled in that context, and we denote by  X p,c   ∈  ℝ d  the gene–expression vector generated for the pair ( p, c ) according to  Eq. 2 . To test the generalization capabilities of the model in an underrepresented context, we fix a test context  c *   ∈  𝒞. We then choose a proportion  α  = 0.30 and draw a support set
 

 
uniformly at random. The remaining perturbations form the target perturbation set  . The training and test splits are then given as follows:
 

 
 

 
Thus, the model sees all perturbations in 𝒞\{ c * } and only 30% of the perturbations in the test context  c * . If |𝒞 | is large, a diverse fixed subset 𝒞 test   ⊂  𝒞 of  n  contexts is designated as test contexts. We form 𝒟 train  from the 𝒞\𝒞 test  contexts, as well as 30% of the perturbations from each  c j   ∈  𝒞 test . We then construct multiple 𝒟 test , one from each  c j   ∈  𝒞 test , each containing the remaining unseen perturbations from  c j . If |𝒞 | is small, we  iteratively  leave out a single context  c *  = 𝒞\{ c j }, form 𝒟 train  with the remaining  c j  contexts as well as 30% of the perturbations from  c j  and 𝒟 test  from the remaining unseen perturbations from  c j . This iteration creates multiple training sets, allowing to report performance over separately trained models. In both cases, we report the mean loss across 𝒟 test , yielding a robust estimate of the model’s ability to extrapolate to unseen perturbations within an underrepresented context. Unperturbed cells from all contexts including the underrepresented context are available to the model during training.

Next, we evaluate the ability to generalize perturbation effects in a zero-shot manner across biological contexts ( Fig. 3F ). To enhance performance on this task, we include a pre-training step. Each model is initially pre-trained on one or more large perturbation datasets (e.g., Tahoe-100M) and subsequently fine-tuned to a different dataset, referred to as the query dataset, via full fine-tuning. The model is then tested on a held-out context within the query dataset.

Specifically, the model is first pre-trained on one or more datasets that include perturbations across multiple contexts. Then, given a query dataset, we hold out one context and use the remaining contexts for fine-tuning. The contexts used for fine-tuning contain  a superset of the perturbations  found in the held-out context. The fine-tuned model is evaluated on its ability to predict the effects of those perturbations within the held-out context of the query dataset. Formally, the fine-tuning process involves partitioning the set of contexts in the query dataset into 𝒞 fine-tune   ⊂  𝒞 and 𝒞 test   ⊂  𝒞 with 𝒞  fine-tune   ∩  𝒞 test  = ∅. The data used in the fine-tuning phase
 

 
contain all perturbations in 𝒞 fine-tune . After fine-tuning  f θ  on 𝒟 fine-tune , we evaluate it on the same perturbations  p ∈  𝒫 but in unseen, held-out cell lines  c ∈  𝒞 test . Thus, the test set is
 

 
This task directly assesses whether the model has learned generalizable relationships between biological context and perturbation response. Unperturbed cells from all contexts including the held out context are available to the model during training.

ST is a deep learning model that learns the transcriptomic responses to perturbations across populations of cells. The model uses a transformer architecture with self-attention across cells to predict perturbation effects between control and perturbed cell distributions. Let
 

 
denote a dataset of single–cell RNA-sequencing measurements over the gene set, with  G  the number of genes. Here,  x ( i )  represents the normalized expression vector for cell  i , after its raw count values have been processed. Specifically, the raw count value observed for gene  j  in cell  i  after perturbation  p i  (if any) is initially  . These raw counts are depth-normalized and log-transformed using Scanpy( normalize_total  →  log1p ), yielding non-negative, real-valued expression vectors  x ( i ) . Each cell is annotated with perturbation label  p i   ∈  {1, …,  P }  ∪  { ctrl }, a biological context or cell line label  ℓ i   ∈  {1, …,  L }, and an optional batch effect label  b i   ∈  {1, …,  B }.

We group cells into sets based on their biological context, perturbation, and batch labels:
 

 
Let  N ℓ,p,b  = |𝒞 ℓ,p,b | denote the number of cells in each group. Given a target set size  S , we partition 𝒞 ℓ,p,b  into non-overlapping subsets of size  S  to construct a collection of tensors  , where  . If  N ℓ,p,b  is not divisible by  S , the remaining cells form a final, smaller set, which is padded to size  S  by sampling additional cells with replacement from itself.

During training, each set  , where  p ∈  {1, …,  P } { ctrl }, is paired with a corresponding control set. The control set is constructed by randomly sampling  S  control cells from the same cell line  ℓ , and optionally same batch  b . Formally, for each training example  , we construct a paired control set via a  map  operation:
 

 
This mapping is applied uniformly, regardless of whether   contains perturbed or control cells. The choice of  map  function effectively determines which sources of variation are explicitly controlled for. By conditioning on specific covariates (e.g., cell line  ℓ , batch  b ), the mapping function reduces known sources of heterogeneity that could otherwise confound true perturbation signals. Different mapping strategies introduce different priors on non-perturbational variation. For instance, sampling control cells from the same batch can reduce technical variation but limit the number of unique cells per set, which may limit model performance.

To construct mini-batches, we collect  B  such set pairs,  , where different pairs may originate from a different combination of cell line, perturbation, and (optionally) batch. These are then arranged into the following tensors:
 

 
where  D pert  and  D batch  denote the dimensionalities of the perturbation and batch embeddings, respectively. For S tate , we use one-hot encodings of perturbation and batch, so  D pert  equals the number of unique perturbations across the data, and  D batch  equals the number of unique batch labels. ST takes  X ctrl  as input along with the perturbation embeddings  Z pert  and learns to predict  X target  as output, learning to transform control cell populations into their corresponding perturbed states.

ST uses specialized encoders that map cellular expression profiles, perturbation labels, and optionally batch labels into a shared hidden dimension  d h , which serves as the input to the transformer.

Each log-normalized expression vector  x ( i )   ∈  ℝ G  is mapped to an embedding via a 4-layer MLP with GELU activations. The MLP  f cell  is applied to each cell independently across the entire control tensor:
 

 
This transforms the input shape from ( B × S × G )  →  ( B × S × d h ).

Perturbation labels are encoded into the same embedding dimension  d h . For one-hot encoded perturbations, the input vector is passed through a 4-layer MLP with GELU activations:
 

 
This transforms the input shape ( B × S × D pert )  →  ( B × S × d h ) (note the perturbation embedding is the same for all cells within the same set of a given batch). Alternatively, when perturbations are represented by continuous features (e.g., molecular descriptors or gene embeddings), the embeddings are directly used in  H pert  and we set  d h  =  D pert .

To account for technical batch effects, batch labels  b i   ∈  {1, …,  B } are encoded into embeddings of dimension  d h :
 

 
where  f batch  is an embedding layer. This transforms the input shape from ( B × S × D batch )  →  ( B × S × d h ).

The final input to ST is constructed by summing the control cell embeddings with the perturbation and batch embeddings:
 

 
This composite representation is passed to the transformer backbone  f ST  to model perturbation effects across the cell set. The output is computed as:
 

 
where   represents the final output. This formulation encourages the transformer  f ST  to learn perturbation effects as residuals to the input representation  H .

When working with inputs directly in expression space, the gene reconstruction head maps the output of the transformer,  O , back to gene expression space. This is done with a linear projection layer, applied independently to the  d h -dimensional hidden representation of each token within each cell set. Specifically, for each cell  b  in the batch, where   is the transformer output for cell  b , the reconstructed gene expression   is given by:
 

 
where   and  b recon   ∈  ℝ G  are learnable parameters. This operation transforms the hidden representations, yielding reconstructed log-transformed gene expression values for each cell in the batch.

For each mini-batch element  b , we consider the set of  S  predicted cell expression vectors of cells within the batch (therefore those sharing the same combination of cell line  ℓ  and perturbation  p , as described in  Eq. 12 ). With a slight abuse of notation, we denote this set as   such that  , and the corresponding set of  S  target cell expression vectors of cells within the batch as   such that  . The MMD is then used to minimize the distance between the empirical probability distributions implicitly defined by these two finite sets of vectors.

For notational convenience, for a training minibatch of  B  cell sets, we define the batch-averaged MMD loss as the average of these MMD 2  values:
 

 
Minimizing this loss encourages the model to generate sets of perturbed cell expression vectors whose overall statistical properties, as captured by the MMD, consistent with perturbation labels and match those of the observed cell sets. The total loss is:
 

 


ST offers the flexibility to be trained either directly in gene expression space or in a specified embedding space. When trained directly in gene expression space, ST operates on the top 2,000 highly variable genes (HVGs) as identified in our preprocessing. In this mode, the model is referred to as ST+HVG in our results. To enable training in an embedding space, the architecture is modified to include an additional expression decoder. Formally, let  E  denote the dimensionality of the embedding space, where typically  E ≪ G . The tensors  X target  and  X ctrl , now denoted as   and  , are of dimension  B × S × E . Accordingly,  f cell  is modified to transform the input shape from ( B × S × E )  →  ( B × S × d h ), and  f recon  is modified to transform the output shape from ( B × S × d h )  →  ( B × S × E ). This output is denoted as  . The other encoders and the transformer itself remain unchanged.

Although genes in the cell expression set are sorted by expression level, their magnitudes are not explicitly encoded or used by the model. Instead, SE incorporates expression values directly using an expression embedding scheme inspired by soft binning ( Hao et al., 2024 ). For the  ℓ -th most expressed gene in cell  i ’s expression set (which corresponds to gene ID  ) with log-normalized expression value   in cell  i , we compute a soft bin assignment:
 

 
 

 
where MLP count  : ℝ  →  ℝ 10  consists of two linear layers (dimensions 1  →  512  →  10) with LeakyReLU activation, and   are learnable bin embeddings of dimension  h . The resulting expression encodings   are added to the corresponding gene identity embeddings  :
 

 


The input expression set, composed of expression-aware gene embeddings and special tokens, is passed through the transformer encoder  f SE :
 

 
where each   is as in  Eq. 27 . Note that the expression encodings are set to zero for the special tokens  [CLS]  and  [DS] .

SE is trained using a self-supervised learning framework with two complementary objectives: (1) a gene expression prediction task, and (2) an auxiliary dataset classification task that helps disentangle technical batch effects from biological signal.

ℛ a set of |𝒩 (i)  |= 256 genes randomly sampled from the full gene set,  shared for all cells in the batch .

For each cell  i  in a training batch, let   denote the row vector containing the set of predicted expression values for the genes in 𝒫  ( i )   ∪  𝒩  ( i )   ∪  ℛ, and let   denote the row vector with corresponding true expression values. The tensors are stacked across cells in the batch:   and  , with resulting shape ( B ×  1  ×  1280). The gene-level loss is:
 

 
and therefore it effectively measures the similarity between predicted and true gene expression patterns within each cell  b  (which is then averaged across cells in ℒ gene ).

To capture variation in gene expression across cells in the mini-batch, we also compute a cell-level loss using the shared subset of genes ℛ. Let   and   denote the predicted and true expression values in cell  i  for the shared genes ℛ. These tensors are stacked across cells in the batch and transposed:   and  , resulting in shape (|ℛ|  ×  1  × B ), with |ℛ| = 256. We then compute the distance between the concatenated predictions and targets across all cells in the batch for each gene. Specifically, we consider the r-th gene (row) of the transposed tensors, denoted as  Ŝ ′( r )  and  S ′( r )  (each being a 1 ×  B  vector):
 

 
and therefore it effectively measures the similarity between predicted and true gene expression across cells in the batch for each gene in ℛ (which is then averaged across genes in ℒ cell ).

To disentangle dataset-specific technical effects from biological variation, we introduce an auxiliary dataset prediction task. Using the  [DS]  token embedding, the model predicts the dataset of origin:
 

 
with   as in  Eq. 30 . We employ cross-entropy loss:
 

 
where  d ( b )  denotes the true dataset label for cell  b  in the batch, and   is the predicted label.

In our implementation, cells within the same AnnData file are treated as originating from the same dataset for this classification task. For our SE model trained on Arc scBaseCount, CZ CELLxGENE, and Tahoe-100M, this task becomes a multi-class classification problem over approximately 14,000 datasets. This auxiliary objective encourages the model to pool the relevant information in this token position, disentangling it from true biological signal. Empirically, since datasets in scBaseCount are organized by Sequence Read Archive experiment identifiers (SRX), which typically correspond to individual cell types or experimental conditions, the dataset token captures cell type and cell line information alongside technical batch effects. Since this token embedding is derived exclusively from the expression set representation without incorporating metadata, the trained model can be used at inference time without requiring explicit specification of technical parameters.

We used several single-cell perturbation datasets in this study: Tahoe-100M dataset ( Zhang et al., 2025 ), the Replogle-Nadig dataset ( Replogle et al., 2022 ;  Nadig et al., 2025 ), the Parse-PBMC dataset ( Parse Biosciences, 2023 ), the Jiang dataset ( Jiang et al., 2020 ), the McFaline dataset ( McFaline-Figueroa et al., 2019 ), and the Srivatsan dataset ( Srivatsan et al., 2020 ) ( Table 1 ). All datasets were filtered to retain measurements for 19,790 human protein-coding Ensembl genes and subsequently normalized to a total UMI depth of 10,000. Raw count data were log-transformed using  scanpy.pp.log1p . For analyses on highly variable genes (HVGs) throughout this work, for each dataset, the top 2,000 HVGs were identified using  scanpy.pp.highly_variable_genes . Log-transformed expression values for these HVGs were used as gene-level features. PCA embeddings of cells were computed using  scanpy.pp.pca .

Perturbation-level filtering : Retain only those perturbations (except controls) whose average knockdown efficiency meets a minimum threshold, residual expression is  ≤  0.30.

Minimum cell count : Drop any perturbations that have fewer than a specified number of remaining valid cells (30), while always preserving control cells.

SE was trained on 167 million human cells across the Arc scBaseCount ( Youngblut et al., 2025 ), CZ CELL×GENE ( Program et al., 2025 ), Tahoe-100M ( Zhang et al., 2025 ) datasets ( Table 2 ). To avoid data leakage in our context generalization benchmarks, we trained on 20 Tahoe-100M cell lines separate from the five held out cell lines from ( Fig. 2 ). scBaseCount data was filtered to only retain cells with at least 1,000 non-zero expression measurements and 2,000 UMIs per cell. A subset of AnnData files were left out for computing validation loss.

The ST architecture utilizes a shared hidden dimension, denoted as  h , across its modules. Each encoders maps its respective inputs to this  h -dimensional space, which also serves as the internal dimension for the transformer layers. The core transformer module,  f ST , is either based on a LLaMA ( Touvron et al., 2023 ) backbone or a GPT2 ( Radford et al., 2019 ) backbone, provided in HuggingFace. We use a GPT2 backbone for sparser datasets, such as Replogle-Nadig ( Replogle et al., 2022 ;  Nadig et al., 2025 ), due to LayerNorm’s desirable centering transform operations that revive dead neurons in low-data regimes ( Lyle et al., 2024 ). All models are modified to use bi-directional attention. Dimensionality and parameterization of the backbone used in  Fig. 2  are provided in  Table 3 . Since cell order within each set is arbitrary, no positional encodings are used. Additionally, dropout is not applied within the transformer. Additionally, as we work directly in vector space, we deactivate the model parameters allocated for word embeddings. Before training, most ST weights are initialized sampling from Kaiming Uniform   ( He et al., 2015 ) with the exception of the transformer backbone which is initialized from 𝒩 (0, 0.02 2 ). Detailed configurations for each neural network module are summarized in  Table 4 .

G  denotes the number of genes ( Eq. 13 ),  E  the dimension of cell embeddings (if used) ( Eq. 22 ),  D pert  the dimension of perturbation features ( Eq. 14 ),  D batch  the dimension of batch features ( Eq. 15 ), and  h  the shared hidden dimension. All MLPs use GELU activation and Layer Normalization before activation, unless specified otherwise.

All components are trained end-to-end with using the objectives described previously. These components include the control cell encoder  f cell , perturbation encoder  f pert , optional batch encoder  f batch , transformer backbone  f ST , reconstruction and decoding heads  f recon  and  f decode .

For the fine-tuning tasks ( Fig. 3G ), we initialize a new ST model using the pretrained weights while selectively reinitializing specific components that are dataset-specific. In particular, the perturbation encoder  f pert  is reinitialized to enable transfer across perturbation modalities. If ST is trained using cell embeddings, the gene decoder  f decode  is also reinitialized to adapt to differences in gene coverage between datasets. Since different experimental platforms and datasets typically measure distinct subsets of genes, the decoder must be retrained to map from the shared embedding space to the target dataset’s specific gene expression space. All other components —  f cell ,  f batch , and  f ST  — retain their pretrained weights and are finetuned on the target dataset.

SE was trained on a large-scale corpus of 14,420 AnnData files spanning 167 million human cells across the Arc scBaseCount ( Youngblut et al., 2025 ), CZ CELL×GENE ( Program et al., 2025 ), and Tahoe-100M ( Zhang et al., 2025 ) datasets for 4 epochs. To avoid data leakage, datasets were split into separate training and validation sets at the dataset level. To enable efficient training at scale, we utilize Flash Attention 2 ( Dao, 2024 ), with mixed precision (bf16) training ( Kalamkar et al., 2019 ). Training was distributed across 4 compute nodes, each with 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs. The model was trained with an effective batch size of 3,072, using per-device batch size of 24 and gradient accumulation over 4 steps.

This metric calculates a Pearson correlation coefficient between the predicted and observed expression deltas. The expression delta is computed as the difference in transcriptomes between a perturbed pseudobulk and an unperturbed pseudobulk. Specifically, for each perturbation  t  we form a pseudobulk   and a control   and compute the expression delta:  , the element-wise absolute difference between the mean expression of perturbed cells   and control cells  . The evaluation score is the Pearson correlation
 

 
computed with  scipy.stats.pearsonr  across all perturbations.

To evaluate the impact of cell set size in S tate , we ablated the number of cells per set and the batch size, such that the batch size times the cell set size was always 16,384, and measured the validation loss as a function of floating-point operations (FLOPs) ( Fig. 1C ). These models were also compared to a pseudobulk model that replaces the self-attention in S tate  with mean pooling, and masked attention version of S tate , where each cell can only attend to itself. As the cell set size increased, the validation loss improved significantly on held out cell lines, up to an optimal value of 256.

In order to assess whether the model could be used to predict the survival of each cell line within each drug well, a previously used measure of fitness ( Yu et al., 2024 ), we built a model to predict survival based on the mean expression of the 2K HVG set relative to DMSO for each cell type. Specifically, for the held-out set of cell lines and perturbations, we calculated a vector of true gene expression differences between DMSO and the perturbation. Then, we trained a support vector machine model to predict survival values based on these vectors, with all 3 doses from 35 randomly selected drugs held out. Finally, we used the same SVM model to predict the survival for these held-out treatments, first predicting on the true gene expression counts, followed by the predicted, cell-type mean, and pert-mean. In order to calculate confidence intervals, this process was repeated 10 times, with a different set of drugs being held out each time.

This baseline predicts a perturbed expression profile as the control mean for that cell context plus a global perturbation offset learned from the training data. For each cell type  c  and perturbation  p  we first compute cell-type–specific means
 

 
where 𝒞 c  is the set of control cells of type  c  and 𝒫 c,p  the perturbed cells of type  c  receiving perturbation  p . Their difference is the cell-type offset  . Averaging across all cell types that contain  p  yields a global offset
 

 
Given a test cell type  t  and a perturbation label  p  the model outputs
 

 
Thus, controls are reproduced exactly, while every non-control perturbation receives the same global shift.

This baseline predicts a cell’s post-perturbation profile by returning the average perturbed expression of  cells of the same cell type  observed in the training set. For every cell type  c  we collect all training cells whose perturbation is not the control and form the pseudo-bulk mean
 

 
At inference time, for a test cell  i  with cell type  c ( i )  and perturbation label  p ( i )  we predict
 

 
i.e. controls are passed through unchanged, whereas perturbed cells inherit their cell-type mean.

This baseline treats a perturbation as a low-rank, gene-wide linear displacement that is added to each cell’s own control expression ( Ahlmann-Eltze et al., 2024 ). Let   be a fixed gene-embedding matrix (e.g. pretrained protein feature vectors, one row per gene) and   a fixed perturbation-embedding matrix (one row per perturbation, one-hot). From the training set we first build an “expression-change” pseudo-bulk
 

 
so  Y ∈  ℝ G×P  stores, for every gene  g  and perturbation  p , the average change relative to that cell’s matched control. The model seeks a low-rank map   and a gene-wise bias  b   ∈  ℝ G  such that
 

 
We obtain  K  in a single shot by solving the ridge-regularized least-squares problem
 

 
whose closed-form solution is
 

 
No gradient-based optimization is required, as once  K  is computed the model is fixed. For a test cell  i  with its own control profile  x ctrl,( i )  and perturbation label  p ( i )  the prediction is
 

 
where   denotes the row of  P  corresponding to perturbation  p ( i ) . Thus each prediction preserves the cell’s basal state exactly and adds a perturbation-specific, low-rank shift learned from the training cohort, with model capacity controlled solely by the embedding dimensions and the ridge parameter  λ .

We benchmark S tate  against several baselines that leverage related deep learning architectures for predicting perturbation effects across diverse cell contexts. These include two autoencoder-based models, scVI ( Lopez et al., 2018 ) and CPA ( Lotfollahi et al., 2023 ), as well as the transformer-based scGPT model ( Cui et al., 2024 ). scVI models gene expression distributions while accounting for technical noise and batch effects. CPA learns a compositional latent space that captures the additive effects of perturbation, dosage, and cell type. scGPT leverages generative pretraining on over 33 million cells to support zero-shot generalization across tasks including perturbation prediction. All models are evaluated using the respective datasets and setup described in  Fig. 2B .

In this section, we analyze the theoretical capacity of State Transition (ST) in learning optimal transport mappings across cellular distributions. First, we prove that the solution family of ST covers the optimal transport map between control and perturbed cell distributions. Second, we derive explicit constraints on ST for learning the unique continuous optimal transport map. Finally, we discuss the implications of the theoretical analysis and possible future directions.

For this analysis, we focus on a single training mini-batch, denoted as the  b -th batch. We start by describing the mathematical formulation of ST, which aims to learn the effect of one single perturbation from cell population   to  . Recall that the input of the transformer for this batch is constructed by summing the control cell embeddings with the broadcasted perturbation and batch embeddings,   ( Eq. 16 ). The output of the transformer is computed as  O ( b )  =  H ( b )  +  f ST H ( b )   ∈  ℝ S×d , where  f ST  is the transformer encoder ( Eq. 17 ). We consider  f ST  with  L  layers, where the input to the first layer is  H 0  =  H ( b ) :
 

 
Here  A i  denotes the multi-head attention,  V   i  denotes the attention value encoder, and  G  + Id denotes the feedforward layer combined with the residual connection. The layer normalization function is absorbed in each constructed function. Finally, for the  b -th batch, a cell-wise linear transform defines the final output   for the  S  cells ( Eq. 18 ). We can equivalently rewrite this for each cell  s  as:
 

 
where   denotes the  s -th row of  , containing the predicted state of cell  s , obtained by its embedding   which denotes the  s -th row of  O ( b ) .

The constants , as well as the transforms  f cell ,  f recon  can be absorbed in the first and last layers of  f ST , which we therefore define as  . Therefore, we can equivalently rewrite the predicted state of cell  s  as:
 

 
where [ · ] s  indicates that we access the  s -th row of the obtained output. To simplify our analysis, we focus on the asymptotic setting where the cell set size  S  tend to infinity. Recall that each cell is sampled from the distribution 𝒟 ctrl . Then, as the cell number  S → ∞  with certain regularity conditions, the output for a single cell   depends solely on   itself and the overall distribution 𝒟 ctrl , because the attention mechanism effectively processes information from the entire distribution. Thus, the limiting operator can be defined per cell as:
 

 
More detailed treatments are provided in recent works considering the limiting mean-field dynamics of transformers ( Furuya et al., 2024 ;  Biswal et al., 2024 ). Notably,  Eq. 56  holds for an arbitrary cell  s  sampled from the distribution 𝒟 ctrl . The operator  F pert,batch  defines a mapping from 𝒟 ctrl  to  . We further assume that the transformer model is expressive enough, such that minimizing the empirical kernel MMD objective is possible:   with energy kernel  k ( u, v ) = −  ∥u  −  v∥   2 . Our following lemma shows that zero empirical MMD indicates distributional matching with probability 1.

Despite the large feasible solution set that contains numerous overfitting solutions, neural network models have shown remarkable generalization capacities. An important aspect on neural network generalization capabilities is implicit bias ( Soudry et al., 2018 ;  Gunasekar et al., 2018 ;  Vardi, 2023 ), which means gradient descent favor certain solutions, for instance, those minimally shifted compared with initial weights ( Gunasekar et al., 2018 ). Therefore we hypothesize that the optimization of ST may lead to solutions with smallest “overall shifts” from 𝒟 ctrl  to 𝒟 pert , thus resembling a optimal transport mapping with some unknown cost function. Theoretical characterization of the implicit bias in the transition model is out of the scope here and remains promising future research.

We begin by evaluating cell embeddings produced by SE. Given the embedding model’s impressive performance in a zero-shot setting across datasets, it is instructive to examine S tate ’s embedding structure. As shown in  Fig. S9A , the principal components of State embeddings capture nuanced distinctions across and within cell types, suggesting a rich representation for transfer. Notably, embeddings for K-562 and Jurkat (two leukemia cell lines) cluster closely in this space, implying similarity under S tate ’s learned representation, following results in  Nadig et al. (2025) . Importantly, SE was trained without direct knowledge that K-562 and Jurkat share these similarities, and recognizes and leverages such biological concepts purely from self-supervision over gene expression data.

Model parameters are available on Huggingface:  https://huggingface.co/arcinstitute/SE-600M ,  https://huggingface.co/arcinstitute/ST-Tahoe ,  https://huggingface.co/arcinstitute/ST-Parse

A.K.A and Y.H.R. conceived the S tate  project. P.D.H. and S.K. conceived Arc’s Virtual Cell Initiative. Y.H.R., H.G, D.P.B, A.D, P.D.H. and S.K. supervised the project, with Y.H.R. coordinating effort across the team. Y.H.R. designed the machine learning problem. A.K.A. and Y.H.R. developed the ST approach; A.K.A. implemented the data loaders, ST model, and scaling for SE pretraining. A.K.A., D.G., and Y.H.R. iteratively improved the ST architecture; A.K.A., A.I., R.S., R.I., and Y.H.R. improved the SE architecture. N.T. combined ST and SE into a unified State code base. Y. H. R., N.T., A.D., S.K. and B.E. designed evaluation metrics. M.N., S.N. designed and ran baseline perturbation models. D.G. analyzed ST self-attention and optimized metrics and data loaders. B.B. developed the initial theoretical formulation, which M.D. formalized to develop the proof showing that ST can learn optimal transport. B.B, D.G formalized model description. A.I. curated the pretraining dataset for SE and conducted training experiments for both SE and ST, including scaling experiments, pretraining for ST, zero-shot and few-shot evaluations, and biological context generalization. R.S helped curate the pretraining dataset for SE and evaluate SE embeddings. N.T. wrote the evaluation suite. Y.H.R. performed the cell type specificity DE analysis. C.C conducted a survival analysis. V.S. conducted an analysis on drug-drug similarity. A.W. conducted mutant analysis to find cell type specific perturbation effects. S.T. optimized State code for multi-node training. J.S. helped with multi-node training and setting up the compute infrastructure. N.Y. designed a web portal. C.R.T created visuals for main text figures. J.L and L.A.G. provided feedback on experiments and problem formulation. Y.H.R. designed the figures and initial manuscript outline, and Y.H.R., H.G., D.P.B. wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors wrote the final draft of the manuscript.

A.K.A., Y.H.R., H.G. and D.P.B. are inventors on a patent filed by Arc Institute relevant to S tate . D.G. acknowledges outside interest as part of the founding team of the Autoscience Institute. D.P.B. acknowledges outside interest as a Google Advisor. H.G. acknowledges outside interest as a co-founder of Exai Bio, Tahoe Therapeutics, and Therna Therapeutics, serves on the board of directors at Exai Bio, and is a scientific advisory board member for Verge Genomics and Deep Forest Biosciences. L.A.G. is a cofounder of nChroma Bio and a Scientific Advisory Board member of Myllia Biotechnology. P.D.H. acknowledges outside interest as a co-founder of Monet AI, Terrain Biosciences, and Stylus Medicine, serves on the board of directors at Stylus Medicine, is a board observer at EvolutionaryScale and Terrain Biosciences, a scientific advisory board member at Arbor Biosciences and Veda Bio, and an advisor to NFDG, Varda Space, and Vial Health. Y.H.R. is a scientific advisory board member at QureXR.

Cells were grouped based on shared features (e.g., tissue, lineage, or batch), enabling the model to learn perturbation effects conditioned on set size and the matched covariates.

Pseudobulks were computed by averaging the counts over all cells with matching cell line, perturbation, and plate, and then aggregated into one pseudobulk per cell line. Generalization splits were chosen accordingly to not be too difficult (including some cell types near clusters), nor too easy (including some outlier cell types). The five holdout cell lines used in this analysis are: C32, HOP62, HepG2/C3A, Hs 766T, PANC-1.

Model performance on perturbation effect prediction on a context for which perturbation data is completely unobserved during training. Performance improvements correspond to change between ST + SE and ST + HVG. Six metrics are considered (i) Perturbation Discrimination Score (ii) Pearson Correlation (iii) AUPRC (iv) Spearman correlation (log fold changes) (v) DE Gene Overlap Accuracy (vi) Spearman correlation (perturbation effect size).

(A)  Spearman correlation between model predicted and true perturbation effect sizes when predicting on a context for which perturbation data is completely unobserved during training. Performance improvements correspond to change between ST + SE and ST + SE (Pretrained). Five datasets are considered.  (B)  Model performance on perturbation effect prediction zero-shot on a context that is unobserved during training. Performance improvements correspond to change between ST + SE and ST + SE (Pretrained). Six metrics are considered (i) Perturbation Discrimination Score (ii) Pearson Correlation (iii) AUPRC (iv) Spearman correlation (log fold changes) (v) DE Gene Overlap Accuracy (vi) Spearman correlation (perturbation effect size).