Large-scale combination drug screens are generally considered intractable due to the immense number of possible combinations. Existing approaches use ad hoc fixed experimental designs then train machine learning models to impute unobserved combinations. Here we propose BATCHIE, an orthogonal approach that conducts experiments dynamically in batches. BATCHIE uses information theory and probabilistic modeling to design each batch to be maximally informative based on the results of previous experiments. On retrospective experiments from previous large-scale screens, BATCHIE designs rapidly discover highly effective and synergistic combinations. In a prospective combination screen of a library of 206 drugs on a collection of pediatric cancer cell lines, the BATCHIE model accurately predicts unseen combinations and detects synergies after exploring only 4% of the 1.4M possible experiments. Further, the model identifies a panel of top combinations for Ewing sarcomas, which follow-up validation experiments confirm to be effective, including the rational and translatable top hit of PARP plus topoisomerase I inhibition. These results demonstrate that adaptive experiments can enable large-scale unbiased combination drug screens with a relatively small number of experiments. BATCHIE is open source and publicly available (https://github.com/tansey-lab/batchie).

We note that a natural alternative to active learning is Bayesian optimization24,25, which also adaptively collects information while taking into account an internal model’s uncertainty of possible experiments. Unlike active learning, whose goal is to model the entire experimental space (perhaps subject to some resolution), Bayesian optimization seeks to find a single optimizer of some objective function, and it assumes the ability to observe evaluations of this function. For the types of objectives considered in this work, such as the therapeutic index, individual evaluations require experiments on drug combinations that span several cell lines, which is potentially wasteful. The active learning approach considered here, meanwhile, has the ability to leverage all observed experiments, regardless of how many cell lines an individual combination is observed on, and it has the added benefit that the end product is a model that makes predictions across the entire space, allowing us to identify many promising candidates instead of just one.

In this work, we introduce Bayesian Active Treatment Combination Hunting via Iterative Experimentation (BATCHIE) as a framework for orchestrating large-scale combination drug screens through sequential experimental design. BATCHIE uses a Bayesian active learning26,27 strategy to design sequential experiments. These sequential designs are theoretically near-optimal (see Supplementary Information for theory and proofs) and guarantee that BATCHIE designs are efficient. Pragmatically, BATCHIE enables sequential experimental designs that will best improve any user-provided probabilistic (Bayesian) model. Thus, while we implemented an initial model for our experiments, BATCHIE can alternatively be paired with any existing and future Bayesian machine learning method for combination drug response. The end result of a BATCHIE screen is a maximally informative dataset and an optimal predictive model that enables the discovery of more effective combinations than in a fixed design (Fig. 1c). We validate the empirical performance of BATCHIE using retrospective simulations and through a prospective study. We first use data from large-scale, pan-cancer combination screens5–7 to retrospectively simulate adaptive screens. BATCHIE consistently outperforms fixed designs in these simulations and better prioritizes effective combinations as top hits. We then implement BATCHIE in a drug screening facility and use it to conduct a combination drug screen across a 206 drug library over 16 cancer cell lines, focusing on pediatric sarcomas. The BATCHIE screen generates a model with near-optimal predictive accuracy on random unseen combinations. Further, we use the model to prioritize ten combinations to validate experimentally for a panel of Ewing sarcoma lines; all ten combinations achieve a high therapeutic index score. The top identified hit corresponds to a PARP inhibitor (talazoparib) plus a topoisomerase I inhibitor (topotecan), a biologically rational combination and the subject of two of the five NCI-supported Phase II combination therapy clinical trials for Ewing sarcoma currently underway. BATCHIE is readily available as open source, along with accompanying tutorials.

BATCHIE uses an active learning algorithm to choose the most informative data to collect in each sequential batch of experiments (Fig. 2). In the initial batch, BATCHIE uses a design of experiments approach28 to cover the drug and cell line space efficiently (Fig. 2a). The initial batch is then run (Fig. 2b) and used to train a Bayesian predictive model that estimates a distribution over drug combination responses for each cell line (Fig. 2c). For subsequent batches, BATCHIE uses the model’s posterior distribution to simulate plausible outcomes of candidate combination experiments along with how they would change the model (Fig. 2d). BATCHIE then measures how much each experiment is expected to reduce the posterior uncertainty over the drug responses (Fig. 2e) and uses a submodular approach to design a maximally informative batch (Fig. 2f). After designing an optimal batch, the batch is run, the model is updated with the new results, and the next optimal batch is constructed. When the exploratory budget runs out or the model converges to a concentrated posterior, the active learning loop ends. The optimally trained model is then used to predict effective combinations that are prioritized for experimental validation (Fig. 2g).

We benchmarked BATCHIE using three large, publicly-available, pan-cancer combination drug screen datasets: the NCI ALMANAC study5 (ALMANAC), the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer combination screen6 (GDSC2), and Merck’s unbiased combination drug screen7 (MERCK). The three datasets differed in cell line library size (60 for ALMANAC, 126 for GDSC2, 39 for MERCK) and drug library size (104 for ALMANAC, 66 for GDSC2, 38 for MERCK). The ALMANAC screen covered the NCI-60 panel of cell lines33, spanning leukemia, lung, colon, central nervous system, melanoma, ovarian, renal, prostate, and breast cancers. The GDSC2 screen covered breast, colon and pancreatic cancer cell lines. The MERCK screen covered a panel of lung, ovarian, melanoma, colon, breast, and prostate cancer cell lines. All three screens used fixed experimental designs but differed in the subset of the combination space to explore. Consequently, the overall sparsity pattern varies substantially between datasets (Fig. 3(b, c)).

At the end of 15 batches, the Random and BATCHIE models observed 1.7–20.4% of the full training dataset (1.66–1.7% for ALMANAC, 10.3–11.1% for GDSC2, and 19.3–20.4% for MERCK). Total observed percentages varied due to the difference in the original screen designs. Across the three datasets, BATCHIE produced models with holdout R2 accuracy within 5–7% of the models that were fit using all available training data and significantly outperformed the models trained on data collected by the Random strategy with the same number of rounds (Fig. 3d).

We also tracked the number of experiments that the Random strategy would need to perform in order to achieve comparable performance to BATCHIE. We observed that the number of experiments saved grew as a function of the number of BATCHIE rounds, with the number of experiments saved by round 15 numbering in the 10s of thousands for the ALMANAC and MERCK datasets to over 100K for the GDSC2 dataset (Fig. 3e). When we looked at the excess number of experiments needed to achieve a certain normalized accuracy, BATCHIE shows an exponential speedup as the model accuracy threshold increases (Supplementary Fig. 1c). When measured by the number of batches needed for Random to achieve BATCHIE-level performance, we again saw a similar exponential trend, but the scale is more consistent across datasets (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Similar trends were seen when measuring the number of excess batches required for the Random model to reach the equivalent performance of the BATCHIE model at each round (Supplementary Fig. 1d).

While these results confirm that BATCHIE produces accurate models with few experiments, average predictive accuracy alone does not ensure that the model will be able to identify highly effective combinations. This is because desirable properties for treatments, such as high therapeutic index (TI)22, often correspond to extremal points, which are not average by definition. To evaluate the ability of BATCHIE to discover effective combinations, we used the BATCHIE-trained model to estimate the TI of all drug combinations using all pairs of cell lines as targets and controls. We chose the top 20 predictions and calculated their average observed TI. For all of the datasets, the BATCHIE-trained model selections had significantly higher TI (max(p)=0.001) than those selected by the Random-trained model (Supplementary Fig. 1e). We also observed that BATCHIE was better at identifying high TI combos in terms of area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (Supplementary Fig. 1f).

To evaluate the robustness of BATCHIE to different goals than therapeutic index, we implemented BATCHIE in the setting where the goal is solely to model synergy or antagonism (Supplementary Fig. 2a). We adapted our retrospective setup so that all single drug data was made available to the models before data collection and predictions were only over Bliss scores. We also implemented a synergy-only Bayesian hierarchical model, making this benchmark an example of the flexibility of BATCHIE to adapt to new designs and alternative models (Methods). Synergy detection is a challenging task as synergies are rare6. In the three benchmark datasets, only 0.12–1.19% of combinations are synergistic and 0.09–0.82% are antagonistic (Supplementary Fig. 2b). We again observed significant gains (max(p)=10−7) in predictive accuracy on held-out data when comparing BATCHIE to the Random design baseline (Supplementary Fig. 2c). We also confirmed that the BATCHIE-trained model is better at detecting top synergy hits and top antagonism hits (Supplementary Fig. 2d,e). Across all three datasets, the BATCHIE model saves approximately 25K experiments compared to the Random strategy by round 15 with similar upward trends in each dataset (Supplementary Fig. 2f).

Current treatments for many pediatric sarcomas have unacceptably high failure rates, particularly for metastatic and recurrent presentations34. Ewing sarcoma35 (EWS), Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), and osteosarcoma36 (OST) are amongst the most common pediatric sarcomas in need of improved treatments. We conducted a large-scale combination drug screen on pediatric cell lines, with a focus on pediatric sarcomas. The study covered 16 cell lines: 5 Ewing sarcoma lines (A673, MSKEWS-38338, MSKEWS-66647, SKNEP, TC-71), 5 osteosarcoma lines (MG-63, MSKOST-11890, SAOS-2, SJSA-1 U2OS), 1 rhabdomyosarcoma line (MSKRMS-12808), 3 other cancer cell lines (Kelly, MDA-MB-231, Wit49), and 2 non-cancer lines (RPE, BJ)(Fig. 4a). The non-cancer lines were included in the study to allow us to evaluate meaningful notions of TI, as high activity in a target cell line alone does not necessarily translate to clinical utility22. Mathematically, we defined therapeutic index to be the minimum viability of the control cell lines (i.e., RPE and BJ) minus the median viability of the target cell lines (e.g., all EWS lines). Thus, a high TI indicates a drug has high activity in the target lines and not in the control lines.

a Prospective study cell line library broken down by type. b Prospective study drug library broken down by mechanism of action. c Overview of prospective study: after 15 rounds of BATCHIE data collection, approximately 4% of possible combinations were observed. Created in BioRender. Tansey, W. (2024) BioRender.com/a40a996. d Observation breakdown by cell line and drug mechanism of action; p-values were computed using Pearson’s chi-square test where the null hypothesis is that experiments were sampled uniformly at random. Colors in the left panel match the corresponding type colors from (a). e Scatter plot of mean BATCHIE predictions v.s. observed viabilities on random validation data. Orange line indicates regression of predictions onto observations, and black line denotes the identity line. f Pearson correlation between predictions and observed viabilities, broken down by cell line, observation status, concentration and cancer type. Maximum p-value satisfies p < 10−15, with no corrections made for multiple comparisons. g ROC curve for synergy identification on random validation data. Synergy is defined here as having an observed Bliss score larger than 0.25. p-value was computed using a one-sided permutation test over 100K permutations. e, f
ρ is Pearson’s ρ correlation coefficient, with p-values calculated under a two-sided alternative. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

The screen was divided into two phases (Supplementary Fig. 3b). In phase I, we started with a focus on OST, using 4 OST lines and a single line each of EWS and RMS. We also included three non-sarcoma cancer cell lines and used a single control line (RPE). After 10 rounds of BATCHIE, we observed the model was converging, as measured by a diminishing improvement of cross-validation accuracy (Supplementary Fig. 3d). We, therefore, paused the screen and assessed the model’s predictions on the three sarcoma types. We observed over three times as many combinations predicted to have high therapeutic index in the EWS line compared to either the OST lines or the RMS line (Supplementary Fig. 3f). As a preliminary test, we selected three drugs (Clofarabine, Eltanexor, and Talazoparib) each of which was predicted to have high TI on the EWS lines at the low concentration when paired with another of the three at the low concentration. We experimentally validated that the three hits had TI in the 90th percentile of all observed combinations through round 10 (Supplementary Fig. 3g).

Since the phase I results suggested that our drug library may contain effective combinations particularly for EWS, in phase II we focused the screen on EWS. We added four EWS lines and removed the other non-sarcoma cancer cell lines. We also added an additional control line (BJ) to increase the robustness of our control set in TI estimates; a fifth OST line (MG-63) was also added. After the single initial seed batch for the newly added cell lines, the BATCHIE model quickly learned that the EWS lines were highly related. Two of the four EWS lines introduced in phase II had significant positive correlation with the phase I EWS line and none of the other phase II lines (Supplementary Fig. 3h). Phase II proceeded for five rounds of BATCHIE until we again observed the model’s cross-validation accuracy converging (Supplementary Fig. 3e). We then ended the adaptive portion of the screen and moved to the validation phase.

The BATCHIE model predictions were highly accurate on the unseen validation data (Fig. 4e, Pearson’s ρ = 0.91, p < 10−15). The accuracy of the model was robust to stratification by cell line, previous observation status, drug concentration, and cancer type (Fig. 4f). Indeed, for 10 of the 11 cell lines, Pearson’s ρ was above 0.82 and was above 0.91 for 9 of the 11. The previous observation status of the drug on the cell line also appeared not to make a large difference, as the correlation remained above 0.91 regardless of whether one, both, or neither of the drugs had previously been observed on the chosen cell lines. We observed that there was dip in performance to ρ = 0.84 when restricting to the low-low doses. This decrease in performance however is confounded since, by chance, half of the low-low validation set was on the SJSA-1 cell line, the cell line on which BATCHIE performed worst. SJSA-1 is an OST line that shares little predictive similarity to the other OST lines (Supplementary Fig. 4f), which may explain its relative difficulty in the test set.

Similar to previous combination cell line screens6,7, we found very few synergistic combinations in the random validation set. Of the 3465 observed combinations, only 13 (0.004%) resulted in a Bliss score larger than 0.25. Nevertheless, the BATCHIE model accurately identified these combinations (Fig. 4g), achieving an AUC of the ROC curve of 0.846 (p = 10−5).

To validate BATCHIE’s ability to discover effective combinations, we used the BATCHIE model to identify combinations with an high expected therapeutic index. We ranked the drug combinations by looking at their predicted viabilities at low concentrations and taking the difference between the minimum predicted viability on the two non-cancer lines and the median viability on the OST and EWS lines. We found that no combinations were predicted to be robust across all OST lines such that the TI would be high. However, we did identify several drug combinations that were predicted to have high TI across a range of EWS lines. We selected 10 of the top-ranked candidates and collected a fine-grained dose-response matrix spanning 0.006 nM–400 nM via four-fold dilution (“Methods”), which included the low concentration combination (Fig. 5a). We also selected 13 negative control combinations that exhibited a large predicted differential effect for at least two cell lines but were not predicted to have a high TI over the five EWS lines.

a Pipeline for top hit selection and validation in the prospective study. The model fit on BATCHIE-collected data is used to simulate outcomes for drug combinations at the low (0.1 μM) concentration. Those simulated values are collected into confidence-rated predictions of TI values. The top hits are then selected for further in vitro experimentation, collecting observations over the full dose-response matrix. Created in BioRender. Tansey, W. (2024) BioRender.com/l79r044. b Observation status of selected top hits in BATCHIE-collected data. c Mean predictions and observed viabilities for selected top hits at 0.1 μM concentration. Pearson’s correlation ρ = 0.92 with p < 10−15 with a two-sided alternative. d Histogram of observed single model EWS TI values for combinations at 0.1 μM concentration in BATCHIE-collected data (gray, n = 659) and top predicted hits (orange, n = 100). Percentiles are drawn with respect to BATCHIE-collected data. e Observed AUCs with respect to the TI dose-response surface for selected top hits and not top hits. d, e
p-values computed using a two-sided Mann-Whitney U-Test. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

We evaluated all (62) combinations at all four possible high/low dose combinations across all five OST lines and our two control lines. The SJSA-1 cell line failed our quality control checks and was removed from our results. We observed a high concordance (Pearson’s ρ = 0.81, p < 10−15) between the predicted viabilities and the observed viabilities (Fig. 6a) on the remaining four lines and six drugs. We grouped each observation by degree of sensitivity or resistance and noted a clear separation between predicted sensitivity level and therapeutic index (Fig. 6b).

a Scatter plot of predicted viability against observed viability on OST hit validation data, colored by cell line. ρ is Pearson’s ρ correlation; p-value computed under two-sided alternative. b Observed single cell line TI scores broken down by prediction status, where highly sensitive/sensitive/resistant/highly resistant correspond to TI scores in the range (0.2,1.0]/(0.1,0.2]/[0.2,−0.1)/[−1.0,−0.2), respectively (n = 61, 33, 32, 24); p-values were computed using a two-sided Mann-Whitney U-Test with no adjustments made for multiple comparisons. Box plot center lines denote means, box limits denote standard deviations, and whiskers denote extremal values. c, d Z-scores of RNA expression and CRISPR knockout scores from DepMap grouped by gene and colored by cell line. e Observed single cell line TI scores; entries correspond to largest mean observed TI score over 4 pairwise concentration combinations. Predicted effect designations are identical to those in (b). f Interpolated TI values for the drug triplet alisertib, talazoparib, trametinib on SJSA-1 and U2OS when the total concentration is held fixed at 1 μM; optimal concentration is denoted by a star. g Per-drug concentrations that optimize single cell line TI score as a function of total concentration. TZP = talazoparib, TRM = trametinib, ALS = alisertib. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

One natural question is whether large-scale adaptive combination screens are even necessary. Ideally, biological knowledge of the disease of interest and the mechanisms of action of the individual drugs would suffice to enable scientists to rationally design combination agents. Unfortunately, most diseases are heterogeneous across patients and most drugs have complicated mechanisms of action that include off-target effects. For instance, we have found that drugs in GDSC2 are twice as likely to correlate best with a drug outside their mechanistic class, compared to a drug within their class (Supplementary Fig. 14a, b). Further, analysis of an expert-designed non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) combination panel66,67 showed that in 9 out of 10 pairwise drug classes in the NCI ALMANAC, less than half of NSCLC lines were optimally targeted by the expert-chosen combinations (Supplementary Fig. 14c). The expert panel also performs suboptimally in other cancer cell lines: in 26 of 27 pairwise drug combination classes in GDSC2, less than half of the cell lines were optimally targeted by the expert panel drugs (Supplementary Fig. 14d). These results suggest that picking the best drugs within a given class is challenging. Overall, we see these results as motivating the need to conduct combination screens to obtain empirical evidence that can be buttressed with expert interpretation and clinical experience.

We downloaded the ALMANAC5, GDSC26, and MERCK7 datasets from their respective sources (see Data Availability). For the MERCK dataset, viabilities were provided. For the ALMANAC dataset, PercentGrowth values were provided. We converted these to viability scores using the formula

For the GDSC2 dataset, well intensity values were provided, along with high control and low control intensities. These were converted to viability scores using the same formula as in the prospective study. For all studies, replicates were averaged to produce a single viability measurement for all recorded cell line, drug-dose 1, drug-dose 2 triplets. Drug-doses that were not present in combination experiments were dropped.

For a given dataset and plate construction, we first created an initial covering plate by randomly selecting observations to greedily cover the cell lines and drug-doses. Given the same dataset, set of plates, and initial covering plate, we ran both the Random and BATCHIE methods. At each round of data collection, the methods picked K cell lines and 3 plates per cell line. K was selected to be 1/10th the number of cell lines in the dataset, rounded down (K = 6 for ALMANAC, K = 12 for GDSC2, and K = 3 for MERCK).

For each dataset construction, we trained a model using the full training set, i.e., everything except for the holdout validation set, by drawing 200 MCMC samples from the posterior using 5 parallel chains, each with a burn-in period of 2000 steps and a thinning factor of 40. Given a holdout set of experiment/viability pairs (x1,y1),…,(xm,ym)∈X×[0,1], a fully trained predictor ffull:X→[0,1], and a candidate predictor f:X→[0,1], the normalized accuracy is given by the ratio of R2 scores:

In rounds 1–10, each plate was run singly. During the phase I validation, we identified that BATCHIE was sensitive to undetectable random well failures producing corrupted data. To address this, in rounds 11–15, plates were run in duplicate and quality control checks flagged wells whose duplicates differed by more than 0.5 in viability.

We define the in vitro therapeutic index (TI) to be a differential score that compares two groups of viabilities: one for the target set of cell lines and one for the control set. A high TI corresponds to low viability for most target cells and high viability for all control cells. To calculate TI, we take the difference between the minimum viability on the control lines and the median viability on the target lines: 

As the concentrations tested in this stage did not align with the concentrations tested in the top hit validation, we performed linear interpolation of the mean observed viabilities (in log10 concentration space), in order to compute TI scores with respect to the control data observed in the top hit validation analysis.

Using the GDSC2 dataset, a single dose-response curve for each drug was formed by considering each observed dose and taking the 5th percentile of mean viabilities over observed cell lines. For each drug, we computed its IC50 concentration over its corresponding dose-response curve, discarding drugs for which no concentrations had corresponding values below 0.5.

Combinations of drugs in which both members belonged to the ‘clinically relevant oncology combination screen’ (CROCS) for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)66 were classified as CROCS combinations. All other combinations of drugs were identified as non-CROCS combinations. For both the ALMANAC dataset and GDSC2 dataset, wherever feasible, we computed an 8 × 8 evenly-spaced (in log10-concentration space) dose-response matrix by linearly interpolating mean observed viabilities. For every pair of drugs i and j and every pair of cell lines c and t, we calculated the TI of i and j where c is control and t as

where Vc,i,di,j,dj is the interpolated viability of cell line c under drug i at dose di and drug j and dose dj and the maximum ranges over the dose grids for drugs i and j, respectively. For ALMANAC, we only considered those TI values for which the target cell line was NSCLC and the control cell line was not NSCLC, while for GDSC2 we considered all possible TI values.

Established cell lines (SJSA-1, U2OS, SAOS-2, MG-63, A673, SKNEP, MDA-MB-231, RPE and BJ) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). TC-71 was obtained from the Children’s Oncology Group cell line repository. Wit49 was provided courtesy of Dr. Herman Yeger (Toronto, Canada). Kelly was obtained from the DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures GmbH. MSKEWS-83311, MSKEWS-83033, MSKEWS-38338, MSKEWS-66647, MSKOST-11890, and MSKRMS-12808 were generated from patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumor tissue established from patient tumors treated at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC). Tumor tissue was dissociated utilizing the Human Tumor Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to manufacturer’s recommendations or using an in-house combination of Collagenase Type II (Gibco), Dispase II (Millipore Sigma), Deoxyribonuclease I (Millipore Sigma) in DMEM (Gibco) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (Corning), followed by mechanical dissociation with Macs dissociator (Miltenyi). MSKCC patients provided informed and signed consent and enrolled onto a tumor profiling research study (Genomic profiling in cancer patients; NCT01775072) approved by the MSKCC Institutional Review Board under protocol IRB#12-245, #06-107, and #17-387 to enable tumor cell line generation. PDX tumor models were generated under MSKCC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee protocol #16-08-011. All PDX-derived samples utilized NGS mice (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ, Jackson Labs Strain #005557), aged between 5 and 8 weeks. Mouse sex was not recorded. Additional cell line information and culture conditions are detailed in Supplementary Data 1. Media was supplemented with 1% Anti-Anti (Gibco) at the time of drug screening. Authentication of established cell lines by short tandem repeat (STR) was performed. Validation and authentication of PDX-derived cell lines were accomplished by next-generation targeted sequencing using MSK-IMPACT86 and matched with source patient tumor. Optimal seeding densities for drug screens were empirically determined for each cell line.

For validation studies, 2-drug combinations were evaluated for random unseen combinations in five osteosarcoma, five Ewing sarcoma, and two non-cancer cell lines; high predicted therapeutic index (TI) in five Ewing sarcoma and two non-cancer cell lines; and Ewing sarcoma ex vivo in two Ewing sarcomas (Supplementary Fig. 11). 7-doses (Plate 1) and 9-doses (Plate 2) 4-fold serial dilutions were prepared into 96-well plates to generate 20X source plates at 8 μM or 20 μM in 10% DMSO (v/v) as the highest concentrations. The plates were further consolidated and combined into 384-well 10X intermediate plates at 4 μM or 10 μM in 10% DMSO (v/v). The 10X intermediate plates were then transferred into assay plates along with cells to produce a 1X concentration of 0.4 μM or 1 μM in 1% DMSO (v/v) (Supplementary Fig. 12b).

Higher order validation plates for Ewing sarcoma and osteosarcoma studies (Supplementary Fig. 11) were performed by first generating 7-doses (Drug 1), 5-doses (Drug 2) and 5-doses (Drug 3) 4-fold serial dilutions, obtaining 30X source plates at 12 μM or 30 μM in 10% DMSO (v/v) as the highest concentrations. The three 30X source plates were combined to create the 10X intermediate plates with maximum concentrations of 4 μM or 10 μM in 10% DMSO (v/v) and stamped to combine with cells to yield 1X assay plates of 0.4 μM or 1 μM in 1% DMSO (v/v) (Supplementary Fig. 12c). Five Ewing sarcoma and two non-cancer cell lines were used for the Ewing sarcoma validation studies and five osteosarcoma lines for the osteosarcoma studies.

Source data are provided with this paper. Original ALMANAC data is publicly available at https://wiki.nci.nih.gov/download/attachments/338237347/ComboDrugGrowth_Nov2017.zip. Original GDSC2 data is publicly available at Figshare [10.6084/m9.figshare.19141916.v1, 10.6084/m9.figshare.19141922.v1]. Original MERCK data is publicly available at Figshare [10.1158/1535-7163.22503133.v1, 10.1158/1535-7163.22503133.v1]. Our postprocessed form of the these publicly available data is available at Zenodo [https://zenodo.org/records/12764821]. The prospective data generated in this study are available at Zenodo [10.5281/zenodo.13871987]. Sequencing data collected on PDX-derived cell lines is not available, as the IRB did not consent patients to release identifiable health information. Source data are provided with this paper.

Source data are provided with this paper. Original ALMANAC data is publicly available at https://wiki.nci.nih.gov/download/attachments/338237347/ComboDrugGrowth_Nov2017.zip. Original GDSC2 data is publicly available at Figshare [10.6084/m9.figshare.19141916.v1, 10.6084/m9.figshare.19141922.v1]. Original MERCK data is publicly available at Figshare [10.1158/1535-7163.22503133.v1, 10.1158/1535-7163.22503133.v1]. Our postprocessed form of the these publicly available data is available at Zenodo [https://zenodo.org/records/12764821]. The prospective data generated in this study are available at Zenodo [10.5281/zenodo.13871987]. Sequencing data collected on PDX-derived cell lines is not available, as the IRB did not consent patients to release identifiable health information. Source data are provided with this paper.