Recent advances in multiplexed single‐cell transcriptomics experiments facilitate the high‐throughput study of drug and genetic perturbations. However, an exhaustive exploration of the combinatorial perturbation space is experimentally unfeasible. Therefore, computational methods are needed to predict, interpret, and prioritize perturbations. Here, we present the compositional perturbation autoencoder (CPA), which combines the interpretability of linear models with the flexibility of deep‐learning approaches for single‐cell response modeling. CPA learns to in silico predict transcriptional perturbation response at the single‐cell level for unseen dosages, cell types, time points, and species. Using newly generated single‐cell drug combination data, we validate that CPA can predict unseen drug combinations while outperforming baseline models. Additionally, the architecture's modularity enables incorporating the chemical representation of the drugs, allowing the prediction of cellular response to completely unseen drugs. Furthermore, CPA is also applicable to genetic combinatorial screens. We demonstrate this by imputing in silico 5,329 missing combinations (97.6% of all possibilities) in a single‐cell Perturb‐seq experiment with diverse genetic interactions. We envision CPA will facilitate efficient experimental design and hypothesis generation by enabling in silico response prediction at the single‐cell level and thus accelerate therapeutic applications using single‐cell technologies.


Given a matrix of gene expression per cell together with annotated potentially quantitative perturbations d and other covariates such as cell line, patient, or species, CPA learns the combined perturbation response for a single‐cell. It encodes gene expression using a neural network into a lower dimensional latent space that is eventually decoded back to an approximate gene expression matrix, as close as possible to the original one. To make the latent space interpretable in terms of perturbation and covariates, the encoded gene expression vector is first mapped to a “basal state” by feeding the signal to discriminators to remove any signal from perturbations and covariates. The basal state is then composed with perturbations and covariates, with potentially reweighted dosages, to reconstruct the gene expression. All encoder, decoder, and discriminator weights as well as the perturbation and covariate dictionaries are learned during training.Features of CPA are interpreted via plotting of the two learned dictionaries, interpolating covariate‐specific dose–response curves and predicting novel unseen drug combinations.


Features of CPA are interpreted via plotting of the two learned dictionaries, interpolating covariate‐specific dose–response curves and predicting novel unseen drug combinations.

Similar to many neural network models, the CPA is trained using backpropagation (Goodfellow et al, 2016) on the reconstruction and discriminator errors (see Materials and Methods), to tune the parameters of the encoder network, the decoder network, the embeddings corresponding to each perturbation and covariate value, and the dose/time nonlinear scalers. The learned embeddings allow the measurement of similarities between different perturbations and covariates, in terms of their effects on gene expression. The main feature of the CPA is its flexibility of use at evaluation time. After obtaining the disentangled embeddings corresponding to some observed gene expression, perturbation, and covariate values, we can intervene and swap the perturbation embedding with any other perturbation embedding of our choice. This manipulation is effectively a way of estimating the answer to the counterfactual question: what would the gene expression of this cell have looked like, had it been treated differently? This approach is of particular interest in the prediction of unseen perturbation combinations and their effects on gene expression. The CPA can also visualize the transcriptional similarity and uncertainty associated with perturbations and covariates, as later demonstrated.

Here, we considered PBMCs from lupus patient samples that were treated with IFN‐β (Appendix Fig S2A). The stimulation, in this case, is a binary one, without any continuous covariate (e.g., dosage or time) associated with it. In order to assess that CPA is capable of decoupling covariate and perturbation information when this is provided we trained two models: (i) one to which only perturbation labels were provided during training, (ii) and one to which both perturbation and cell type labels were provided. We then inspected the basal latent representation obtained with these models, this is the latent information remaining after covariate and/or perturbation information is transferred to the respective embeddings by means of adversarial training. As expected, the latent representation obtained with model (i) shows a good mixing of the perturbations while cell type information is retained (Appendix Fig S2B), on the other hand, the latent values obtained from model (ii) show good mixing of both cell types and perturbations, since in this case labels for both were provided to the model which successfully embedded this information in the correspondent latent factors (Appendix Fig S2C). In order to further demonstrate the differences between the two models we decoded the basal latent representation of B cells without factoring the cell type and perturbations embeddings and looked at the gene expression of CD74 and CD37, two marker genes of B cells in this dataset (Appendix Fig S2D). The cells thus obtained from model (i) show high values of expression for these genes, this happens because cell type information is not decoupled and is retained in the basal latent space, this is not the case for model (ii) where cell type information has been successfully removed from the basal latent space (Appendix Fig S2E).

Furthermore, we leveraged this dataset to assess that the model is capable of learning cell‐type‐specific responses to perturbations. We trained different CPA models holding out perturbed cells belonging to one cell type at a time and then predicted the gene expression of the perturbed cells in these OOD conditions. CPA successfully models the response of various genes to stimulation in different cell types, even in the case of cell‐type‐specific responses (Appendix Fig S3). Sciplex2 from Srivatsan et al (2020) contains measurements of a human lung adenocarcinoma cell line (A549) treated with four drug perturbations at increasing dosages (Appendix Fig S4A). In this scenario, the model learns to generalize to unseen dosages of the drugs. To demonstrate the OOD properties, we withheld cells exposed to the second to largest dose among all drugs. This choice was made because the vast majority of cells were dead for most of the drugs at the highest dosage, and we would not have enough cells to test the generalization capabilities of the CPA model. Since the latent space representation learned by the CPA is still high‐dimensional, we can use various dimensionality reduction methods to visualize it. We opted for a Kernel PCA computed using a cosine similarity kernel (Appendix Fig S4C). To demonstrate how well CPA captured the dose–response dynamics of individual genes, we looked at the top 2 differentially expressed genes upon all perturbations (Appendix Fig S5). The dose–response curves agree well with the observed data. We evaluate the goodness of the prediction by computing the R2 scores between the means and variances of the predicted gene expression and the real one. We compute this on the entire gene expression vector, and on the top 50 DEGs exclusively for that condition, to make sure that we are capturing the response of genes of interest (Appendix Fig S4B). In order to have a point of reference we formulate a baseline which consists of the R2 scores obtained between the OOD conditions and a random subselection of the training dataset (see Benchmarks section in Materials and Methods). Improvements over this baseline show that the model has learned perturbation and covariate information and has not just modeled an average representation of the training data.

We additionally use the distance of the embedding of an unseen condition from the closest embedding in the observed manifold as a proxy for uncertainty (see Materials and Methods). This distance equals 0 for conditions that were observed during training and increases for points in the perturbation and covariate space that were not presented to the model, for example, dosage values between those sampled in the training dataset (Appendix Fig S4D). This distance increases for combinations of drugs (Appendix Fig S4E), this finding agrees with the fact that the model never saw some drug combinations during training and that such predictions are performed on conditions more distant from those observed during training.

Compositional perturbation autoencoder can extrapolate to the unseen OOD conditions with unexpected accuracy, as it captures the difference between control and treated conditions for a compound where it did not see examples with the highest dose. As one example, Momelotinib has a strong differential response to treatment compared to control, as can be seen from the distributions of the top 5 differentially expressed genes (Fig 2B). Despite not seeing the effect of Momelotinib at the highest dose in any of the three cell lines, CPA performs reasonably in inferring the mean and distribution of these genes (Fig 2B). CPA performs well in modeling unseen perturbations, as the correlation of real and predicted values across OOD conditions is overall better than the correlation between target cells and existing cells across different compounds (Fig 2D) when looking at individual conditions (Fig 2C), CPA does well‐recapitulating genes with low and high mean expression in the OOD condition. Furthermore, we compare the performance of CPA against that of scGen on this dataset. scGen is another deep learning method for perturbation prediction in single‐cell datasets. Since this model cannot handle continuous covariates associated with the perturbation, we retain only control and second‐highest dosage cells for this benchmark. We compared the R2 on the predicted means and variances and the Wasserstein distance to measure the whole distribution computed gene‐wise. All metrics were computed on the whole gene vector and also for DEGs. When comparing CPA's predictions with scGen we observed a 1.54% improvement in more straightforward mean prediction compared to higher moments. At the same time, CPA significantly outperformed scGen on variance prediction by 35.85% improvement and similarly outperformed scGen in whole distribution prediction. This benchmark is a very simplified scenario where existing models can be benchmarked and work well on mean prediction but fail to capture whole distribution shifts, which are indeed crucial in single‐cell data since they capture cellular heterogeneity (see Appendix Fig S7).

Compositional perturbation autoencoder performs worse when predicting experiments with more unseen covariates. To assess the ability of the model to generalize to unseen conditions, we trained CPA on 28 splits with different held‐out conditions, with one of the doses held out in anywhere between 1–3 cell lines (Fig 2E). We see here that K562 is the hardest cell line to generalize, when considering training on two cell lines to generalize to another. We also see that extrapolating to the highest dose is a harder task than interpolating intermediate doses, which is consistent with the difficulty of anticipating the experimental effect of a higher dose, versus fitting sigmoidal behavior to model intermediate doses.

One of the benefits of the modular architecture employed by CPA is its flexibility and extensibility. While the perturbation dictionary works well for the compositional structure in the latent space, it is limited to the set of compounds present in the training set. Therefore, predicting perturbation responses for compounds not screened in the experiments is not feasible. To enable the prediction of unseen drugs, a recent extension to this, called chemCPA (see Materials and Methods), has been proposed by Hetzel et al (2022). chemCPA introduced a perturbation network that encodes small molecules using their known chemical descriptors (Fig 4A). This perturbation network replaces the perturbation embedding dictionary in CPA. It comprises a pre‐trained molecule encoder G, a perturbation encoder M, and an amortized dosage scaler S. While M learns to map from the general chemical embedding to the latent perturbation effect zdi for a compound d, the dosage scaler S learns to map to the effective dose s^i given the chemical embedding hdi and the applied dosage si.


Proposed architecture change for CPA to include chemical prior knowledge. The molecule encoder G maps the chemical information of a compound to a latent drug embedding hdi. This module can be based on a pre‐trained graph encoder or molecular fingerprints like here. During training only the perturbation module M and the amortized dosage scaler S are optimized.Comparison between CPA and chemCPA, including a baseline that ignores all drug‐induced perturbation effects. Scores are computed on the sci‐Plex3 (n = 290,889) data on a test set that consists of nine compounds. Both the whole genes set (left) and the DEGs (right) are shown.Performance comparison between the models from (B) for two histone deactylation drugs, Givinostat and Dacinostat, across all doses and cell‐lines (shades).Median scores for the models from (B) for the highest dose value of 10 μM, including the result of chemCPA for the setting in which the nine test compounds are completely unseen and excluded from the training and validation.Comparison between CPA and chemCPA on the new combosciplex (n = 63,378) including the same type of baseline as in (B). The test set consists of all nine drug combinations that include Panobinostat.Detailed performance comparison between the models from (E) for the two conditions with the highest R2 difference on the DEGs.Median scores for the models from (E), including the result of chemCPA where also the single‐drug Panobinostat observations were held‐out. The median score on the DEGs reduces from 0.85 to 0.38.Showing how well chemCPA is able to predict the single‐drug effect of Panobinostat when it is held out. This is compared to the achieved score when Panobinostat is included in the training set (E).


Median scores for the models from (B) for the highest dose value of 10 μM, including the result of chemCPA for the setting in which the nine test compounds are completely unseen and excluded from the training and validation.

To systematically evaluate the CPA's generalization behavior, we trained 13 different models while leaving out all cells from ≈10 unique combinations covering all 131 doubly perturbed conditions in the dataset, which were predicted following training. We compared CPA predictions with linear and random baselines described in the previous section (Fig 5D). Surprisingly, The baseline approach achieved accurate predictions on par with both CPA and linear models. This observation demonstrates that the transcriptomic effects caused by different perturbations are very similar and the dataset contains limited non‐linear effects on the whole transcriptome level. Thus, a linear model or simple baseline can provide accurate predictions on mean as opposed to combinatorial drug effects previously demonstrated. The reported R2 values showed robust prediction for most of the perturbations: lower scores were seen for perturbations where the evaluation was noisy due to sample scarcity (n < 100), or when one of the perturbations was only available as singly perturbed cells in the data, leading the model to fail to predict the unseen combination (Fig 5E, see Appendix Figs S9 and S10). To further understand when CPA performance deteriorated, we first trained it on a subset with no combinations seen during training, and then gradually increased the number of combinations seen during training. We found that overall prediction accuracy improved when the model was trained with more combinations and that it could fail to predict DEGs when trained with fewer combinations (see n < 71 combinations in Fig 5F).

Hence, once trained with sufficiently large and diverse training data, CPA could robustly predict unseen perturbations. We next asked whether our model could generalize beyond the measured combinations and generate in silico all 5,329 combinations, which were not measured in the real dataset, but made up ≈98% of all possibilities. To study the quality of these predictions, we trained a model where all combinations were seen during training to achieve maximum training data and sample diversity. We then predicted 50 single‐cells for all missing combinations. We embedded (Fig 5G) mean gene expression vector of all measured and generated data while reporting an uncertainty value for each condition. (Fig 5H). We hypothesized that the closer the generated embedding was to the measured data. the more likely it was to explore a similar space of the genetic manifold around the measured data. Equipped with this information, we annotated the MIS clusters based on gene prevalence, finding that single genes (i.e. gene x) paired with other genes (i.e., y) as combinations (i.e., x + y) are a main driver of cluster separation (Fig 5I). Genes without measured double perturbations were less likely to be separated as independent clusters using the newly predicted transcriptomic expression (Appendix Fig S11A), suggesting that their interaction‐specific effects were less variable than cases with at least one double perturbation available in the training data. Meanwhile, points distant from measured data can potentially indicate novel gene‐interaction behaviors such as in the case of KLF1 with co‐perturbed genes (Fig 5J). However, this would require additional consideration and validation steps.

The CPA model is not limited to single‐cell perturbations. While we chose the single‐cell setting due to the high sample numbers available, the CPA could readily be applied to large‐scale bulk cohorts, in which covariates might be patient ID or transcription factor perturbation. These and any other available attributes could be controlled independently (Lample et al, 2017) to achieve compositional, interpretable predictions. Any bulk compositional model may be combined with a smaller‐scale single‐cell model to compose truly multi‐scale models of observed variance. The flexibility of the DL setting will also allow addition of constraints on perturbation or covariate latent spaces. These could, for example, be the similarity of chemical compounds (Mater & Coote, 2019), or clinical‐covariate induced differences of patient IDs. The key feature of the CPA versus a normal autoencoder is its latent space disentanglement and the induced interpretability of the perturbations in the context of cell states and covariates. Eventually, any aim in biology is not only blind prediction, but mechanistic understanding. This objective is exemplified by the direction that DL models are taking in sequence genomics, where the aim is not only the prediction of new interactions, but also the interpretation of the learned gene regulation code. We therefore believe that CPA can not only be used as a hypothesis generation tool for in silico screens but also as an overall data approximation model. Deviations from our assumed data generation process (see Materials and Methods) would then tell us about missing information in the given data set and/or missing aspects in the factor model. By including multiple layers of regulation, the resulting model can grow in flexibility for prediction and for mechanistic understanding of for example synergistic gene regulation or other interactions.

We use several metrics to evaluate the performance of our model: (i) quality of reconstruction for in and OOD cases and (ii) quality of disentanglement of cell information from perturbation information. We split each dataset into three subsets: train, validation, and OOD. For OOD cases, we choose combinations of perturbations that exhibit unseen behavior. This usually corresponds to the most extreme drug dosages. We select one perturbation combination as “control”. Usually, these are Vehicle or DMSO if real control samples are present in the dataset; otherwise, we choose a drug perturbation at a lower dosage as “control”. For the evaluation, we use the mean squared error of the reconstruction of an individual cell and average it over the cells for the perturbation of interest. As an additional metric, we use classification accuracy in order to check how well the information about the drugs was separated from the information about the cells.

The chemCPA model (Hetzel et al, 2022) extends CPA by a perturbation network that replaces CPA's perturbation dictionary with a neural network that maps chemical information to the latent drug encoding. This extension allows to infer latent perturbation embedding for compounds that are not originally present in the dataset, i.e. predicting cellular perturbation effects for drugs that are completely unseen. For both presented experiments, we use the default training scripts of the chemCPA model as provided by Hetzel et al (2022) and available at (https://github.com/theislab/chemCPA). For a fair comparison, we tested the same set of hyperparameters for CPA and chemCPA. As molecule encoder G, we rely on the molecular fingerprints, computed with RDKit (Landrum, 2006), as these have shown competitive performance in the performed benchmark in (Hetzel et al, 2022). In the combination setting, we compute one forward pass of the perturbation network per compound and perform latent space arithmetic identically to CPA.

Drug dose combinations were administered as described previously (Srivatsan et al, 2020). Briefly, A549 cells were grown in DMEM media (ThermoFisher Scientific; cat no. 11966025) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin–Streptomycin. These cells were then seeded at 25,000 cells/well in a 96‐well flat bottom plate (ThermoFisher Scientific, cat no. 12‐656‐66). Prior to treatment, stock compounds from SelleckChem (stock concentration of 10 mM) were first diluted to 1:10 in DMSO, followed by a 1:10 dilution in PBS. From this dilution, 1 μl of each compound was added to a culture well in a 96‐well plate containing 99 μl of media. Treatments were performed one day after plating and resulted in a final concentration of 1 μM for each compound. After 24 h of growth at 37°C and 5% CO2, media was removed, cells were washed once with cold PBS, and then enzymatically detached using 50 μl of TrypLE at 37°C for 5 min (ThermoFisher; cat no. 12604013). After detachment, cells were quenched with 100 μl of media containing FBS, transferred to a 96‐well V‐bottom plate, and pelleted at 500 g for 5 min in a swinging bucket centrifuge (Eppendorf 5810r). Media was then aspirated, and cells were washed once with 100 μl cold PBS. Finally, PBS was removed and cells were resuspended in 50 μl of tiny‐sci lysis buffer; see (preprint: Martin et al, 2021) for details.

Five microliters of each well was then transferred, while preserving orientation, to a 96‐well PCR plate. To each well, we added 0.5 μl of 10 mM dNTPs and 1 μl of 10 μM indexed reverse transcription (RT) primer. Indexed RT, indexed ligation and indexed PCR were all performed as described in preprint: Martin et al (2021). For this experiment, a single 96‐well plate of RT primers and a single plate of 96 ligation primers were used. Prior to indexed PCR, 1,000 nuclei were deposited per well. The resulting libraries were purified and sequenced on using the NextSeq 75 cycle high output kit with the following read lengths: 34 bp – R1; 10 bp I1; 48 bp R2. Sequenced reads were demultiplexed, mapped to GRCh38 using STAR, deduplicated, and output as a cell*gene count matrix as described previously (Srivatsan et al, 2020). Sample size was chosen such that single cell transcriptomes could be collected from each drug combination such that cells or molecules either matched or were in excess of previously collected data.

ML and FJT are grateful for valuable feedback from Aviv Regev and Dana Pe'er. We appreciate support from all members of Theis lab, FJT acknowledges support by the BMBF (grant number L031L0214A, grant number 01IS18036A, and grant number 01IS18053A), by the Helmholtz Association (Incubator grant sparse2big, grant number ZT‐I‐0007) and by the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative DAF (advised fund of Silicon Valley Community Foundation, 2018‐182835 and 2019‐207271). This work was further supported by Helmholtz Association's Initiative and Networking Fund through Helmholtz AI [grant number ZT‐I‐PF‐5‐01]. ILI has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement No 874656. Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.