Combinatorial therapies that target multiple pathways have shown great promises for treating complex diseases. DrugComb (https://drugcomb.org/) is a web-based portal for the deposition and analysis of drug combination screening datasets. Since its first release, DrugComb has received continuous updates on the coverage of data resources, as well as on the functionality of the web server to improve the analysis, visualization and interpretation of drug combination screens. Here, we report significant updates of DrugComb, including: (i) manual curation and harmonization of more comprehensive drug combination and monotherapy screening data, not only for cancers but also for other diseases such as malaria and COVID-19; (ii) enhanced algorithms for assessing the sensitivity and synergy of drug combinations; (iii) network modelling tools to visualize the mechanisms of action of drugs or drug combinations for a given cancer sample and (iv) state-of-the-art machine learning models to predict drug combination sensitivity and synergy. These improvements have been provided with more user-friendly graphical interface and faster database infrastructure, which make DrugComb the most comprehensive web-based resources for the study of drug sensitivities for multiple diseases.

With the increasing amount of drug sensitivity screening data, the challenge of translating them into actual drug discovery remains, as recent studies showed that most of clinically approved drug combinations work independently (7), that the efficacy and synergy observed in a pre-clinical setting may not be translated into a clinical trial (8,9). The challenge of utilizing the results from drug combination screens largely resides from un-harmonized metrics for synergy and sensitivity that are derived from different mathematical models, which are often incompatible for the same datasets (10). Another limitation is the lack of standardization of drug combination experimental design and the insufficient level of data curation and deposition to publicly available databases (11). Furthermore, the drug combination data has not been harmonized with single drug screening data, partially due to a lack of computational tools to enable a systematic comparison of drug combination efficacy against single drug efficacy (12).

With the development of high-throughput screening techniques, the number of data points for drug combinations has been greatly increased. For example, the recent Dream Challenge on drug combination prediction has provided more than 20k drug combinations in cancer cell lines (20). Furthermore, drug combination screening has been extended to other disease models such as malaria and Ebola (21). More recently, drug combination screening studies on COVID19 have been conducted, providing important clues for the treatment of the ongoing pandemic (22). In the new version of DrugComb, we aim to expand our manual curation from cancer to other diseases to improve the data coverage. On the other hand, drug combinations need to be harmonized with the monotherapy drug screening data, since these treatment options shall be evaluated using the same endpoint metric (such as progression free survival and overall survival) in clinical trials. Therefore, we aim to harmonize the drug combination with monotherapy drug screening, by providing informatics tools to evaluate their overall sensitivity in a more systematic manner. For this reason, in the new version of DrugComb, we do not limit ourselves for curating drug combination data, but rather we included monotherapy drug sensitivity screening data as well. More importantly, we provide a robust metric to enable a direct comparison of drug combinations and single drugs, as monotherapy drug screening can be considered as a subset of drug combination experiments. The new data harmonization framework thus allows a more systematic evaluation of a drug combination in comparison to a single drug. In addition, we implement several new modules for the analysis of these datasets, including the integration of drug targets and gene expressions of neighbouring proteins in a signalling network, such that the mechanisms of action of a drug or a drug combination can be annotated systematically in a specific cellular context. We also provide a baseline model based on CatBoost to predict the sensitivity and synergy of drug combinations, with which the machine learning community may develop novel algorithms to improve our understanding of drug responses in cancer cells. Taken together, the new version of DrugComb features an enhanced web portal to make drug screening data more interpretable and reusable for various applications such as machine learning, network modelling and experimental validation.

A schematic overview of the DrugComb database and web server pipeline. Drug combination and monotherapy drug screening datasets are curated from public databases, publications or user-upload. After quality control and pre-processing, the cell information is retrieved from Cellosaurus (23), while the drug information is retrieved from multiple databases including PubChem (24), ChEMBL (25), UniChem (26), DrugBank (27), KEGG (28) and DrugTargetCommons (29). The degree of synergy in drug combinations, as well as the sensitivity of drug combinations and single drugs are determined using the SynergyFinder R package (3). For inferring the mechanisms of action of drugs or drug combinations, their targets as well as interacting proteins are visualized in a signalling network, retrieved from STITCH (30) and UniProt (31). Furthermore, the gene expressions of these proteins in the given cancer cells are obtained from DepMap (32) and Cell Model Passports (33), and from BeatAML where the cancer samples were derived from AML (Acute Myeloid Leukaemia) patients (5). Machine learning algorithms utilize chemical structural and gene expression features to predict drug combination synergy and sensitivity. The DrugComb portal enables the query and download of curated raw datasets and analysis results, as well as the contribution of new datasets.

The initial version of DrugComb consists of four drug combination screening studies, covering 437 923 drug combination experiments. We have curated much more drug combination experiments for cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we have incorporated monotherapy drug screening datasets and considered them as a subset of a drug combination experiment, where the other drug is absent. We have also included the drug screening results from patient-derived cancer samples in haematological malignancies (5). In addition to multiple cancer types, we have extended the curation efforts to other diseases such as Ebola, malaria and COVID-19. The manual curation is under high level of quality control, that only those studies that reported the raw dose-response results will be considered, and thus the studies that reported only summary-level results including IC50, AUC (area under the dose response curves) or synergy scores (e.g. combination index) are excluded. We utilized SynergyFinder (3) to determine the synergy scores directly from the raw dose-response data and compared them with those reported in the original publications. Only the datasets that have a correlation higher than 0.6 will be included. Furthermore, dose-response matrices containing abnormal response values, for example percentage inhibition of cell growth less than −200% or larger than 200%, were marked as poor-quality data points for which the data analysis results were not shown in the web interface. We have also standardized the metadata about experimental protocols of these studies so that their differences can be evaluated more systematically. The annotation of the bioassay protocols is based on the BAO (Bioassay annotation ontology) (34), that is commonly adopted for major chemical biology databases including ChEMBL (25), PubChem (24) and DrugTargetCommons (29). For the drugs and cell lines we provided the cross-database references such that their pharmacological and clinical information can be easily accessed (Figure 2A and B). As of March 2021, 751 498 drug combinations, 717 684 single drug screenings from 37 studies are deposited in DrugComb, corresponding to 21 621 279 unique data points spanning 2320 cell lines including 225 cancer types and three infectious diseases. Supplementary Table S1 shows the summary of the data points from the individual studies that are curated and harmonized in DrugComb.

Overview of DrugComb data statistics. (A, B) Classifications of cell lines (n = 2320) and drugs (n = 8397). (C) The CSS score for drug combinations is higher than the RI score for monotherapy drugs, suggesting the general rationale for drug combination studies. (D) The correlations of synergy scores. (E) An example of SS plot for vorinostat and sorafenib combination across 128 cell lines. DLD-1 is a colon cancer cell line, which has shown strong synergy and sensitivity to the combination (38). (F) The synergy landscape over the dose-response matrix of vorinostat and sorafenib in DLD-1.

DrugComb utilizes the SynergyFinder R package to analyse drug combination sensitivity and synergy. The single drug sensitivity is characterized as a dose-response curve with its IC50 and RI (relative inhibition) values. RI is the normalized area under the log10-transformed dose-response curves, which has shown enhanced robustness to characterize drug sensitivity (35). Moreover, RI can be interpreted as percentage inhibition, summarizing the overall drug inhibition effects relative to positive controls. With the RI metric, drug responses of different concentration ranges can be compared, in contrast to IC50 or EC50, which are usually a relative term depending on the tested concentration ranges.

For drug combination sensitivity, we provide a metric called CSS (Combination Sensitivity Score), that is based on the normalized area under the log10-transformed of the combination dose-response curve when one of the two drugs is fixed at its IC50 concentration (12). CSS and RI use the same principle to characterize the overall drug response efficacy, such that their values can be directly compared (Figure 2C). For evaluating the drug synergy, we implement four major mathematical models including Bliss, Loewe, HSA and ZIP (36) and provide the visualization of these scores in the dose-response matrices. Furthermore, we provide a synergy score called S score that is derived from the difference between CSS and RI scores of the combination and single drugs respectively (12). Drug combinations with synergy scores of zero are considered additive, while a positive synergy score suggests synergy, and a negative score suggests antagonism. The five synergy scores are based on different mathematical assumptions such that they do not necessarily match with each other (Figure 2D). For example, the Bliss model assumes probabilistic independence when drugs are non-interactive while the Loewe model assumes that the efficacy of non-synergistic drug combinations is identical to that of a drug combined with itself. The ZIP model, on the other hand, can be considered as an Ensembl model as it combines the assumptions of Bliss and Loewe (36). In actual clinical trials, approval of a drug combination often is based on the HSA model that simply shows that the drug combination improves patient survival compared to monotherapies. To insure the clinical translation of drug combinations, we encourage the use of all the major synergy scoring metrics, such that the top hits that pass the threshold of all of them can be prioritized (37). On the other hand, there have been biases by focusing solely on the synergy, while the sensitivity of a drug combination might be understudied. It is likely that a drug combination produces strong synergy while their overall efficacy is not achieving therapeutic relevance. Therefore, we provide an SS (Synergy-Sensitivity) plot to ensure that both of these two scores can be evenly weighted when interpreting the relevance of a drug combination (Figure 2E, Supplementary Figure S1).

As a unique feature of DrugComb, we visualize the synergy scores of a drug combination at each tested dose. The so-called synergy landscape allows a rich information display to facilitate the interpretation of the data, for which the most synergistic and antagonistic doses can be identified separately (Figure 2F). For a given drug or a given cell line, we provide the boxplots and histograms to show the general distributions of the synergy and sensitivity scores, such that the users may assess the general trend. For example, users may evaluate whether drug combinations involving a particular drug tend to be more synergistic, or a cell line tends to be more sensitive to drug treatment. Note that the majority of the data points (93.2%) that we curated from the literature do not contain replicates, and therefore, we decide not to provide the statistical significance of the synergy and sensitivity over a dose-response matrix, as the significance of individual doses contributing to the overall synergy cannot be systematically assessed. Therefore, we would like to highlight the issue of lack of replicates from a typical drug combination screening that may likely hinder the translation of the results into clinical trials.

For user-uploaded drug combinations or single drugs, ideally the InChiKeys of the drugs should be provided. This allows the web server to query drug STITCH ID from the major drug databases. In case only the drug names are provided, the web server will query from the major drug databases, for which their targets profiles will be visualized in a generic cancer signalling network. In case the cell line names can be matched with the existing gene expression data, their gene expression values will be displayed as coloured nodes. The network modelling results should be interpreted together with the actual drug screening profiles, such that the drug resistance or sensitivity can be related to its target or neighbouring gene expressions (Figure 3B).

Making cancer treatment more effective is what a combination therapy aims to achieve. With the advances of high-throughput drug screening technologies, an increasing number of drug combinations have been tested. However, before we can develop robust machine learning and network modelling algorithms to predict and understand the potential drug combinations, the datasets need to be systematically curated and harmonized. Here we report the major updates of DrugComb, a comprehensive data portal for the drug discovery community to access the concurrent high-throughput drug combination as well as monotherapy drug screening datasets. These datasets have been deeply curated, standardized and harmonized with the data analysis tools including synergy and sensitivity scoring, such that their potential can be maximized within a unified framework. Furthermore, we have updated the network modelling of the drug combinations, such that the transcriptomics profiles of the cancer cell line, and drug target profiles can be integrated in a signalling network where the protein-protein interactions may provide deeper insights on the mechanisms of drugs and drug combinations. In addition, we have provided a machine learning model to predict a given drug combination for a cell line at the single dose level. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first drug combination prediction tool that has been made online with easy accessibility for drug discovery users.

The four basic modules of DrugComb, i.e. (i) data curation, (ii) synergy and sensitivity scoring, (iii) network modelling and (iv) machine learning constitute a workflow of network pharmacological approaches based on which we may gain deeper understanding of drug-drug interactions. Currently, DrugComb focuses on small molecule drugs such as cytotoxic and kinase inhibitors, while immunotherapy and gene therapy drugs are largely missing. Furture steps of DrugComb will involve constant improvement on the data coverage, for example, by including drugs from other classes. Moreover, we will include higher-order combinations that involve more than two drugs (e.g. (21)). In addition, we will consider the datasets from more recent techniques of microfluidic-based drug screening (49), as well as from patient-derived samples such as 3D organoid-based drug screening (50) and patient-derived xenograft mouse models (51). These datasets may help identify drug combinations that are more translational to the clinics compared to cell line-based studies (9). Meanwhile, the data analysis tools will be also updated to incorporate the new data types. For example, we will develop mathematical and statistical methods for analysing and visualizing higher-order drug combinations. Taken together, we envisage that the high-quality data in DrugComb will serve as a benchmark for the development of more robust and predictive machine learning models, for example, to improve the transfer learning from one study to another study, or to an under-studied tissue (18), as well as accurate network-based models to capture the mechanisms of drug combinations that may eventually lead to predictive biomarkers that warrant patient stratification for maximizing the efficacy of combinatorial therapies.