Drug combinations are an important therapeutic strategy for treating diseases that are subject to evolutionary dynamics, in particular cancers and infectious diseases.1,2 Conceptually, as tumors or pathogens are subject to change over time, they may develop resistance to a single agent3—motivating one to target multiple biological mechanisms simultaneously.4 Discovering synergistic drug combinations is a key step toward developing robust therapies, as they hold the potential for greater efficacy while reducing dose and hopefully limiting the likelihood of adverse effects. For example, in a drug repurposing scenario (i.e., uncovering new indications for known drugs), the ReFRAME library of ∼12,000 clinical-stage compounds5 leads to ∼72 million pairwise combinations; this does not appear tractable with standard high-throughput screening (HTS) technology—even at a single dose.6 Moreover, with patient-derived organoids (PDOs) being examined as a biomarker within personalized medicine clinical studies,7,8 the search space expands further to identify efficacious drug combinations specific to the mutation profile in question.

With the recent COVID-19 global health crisis, there has been the need for rapid drug repurposing that would allow for expedited and derisked clinical trials. Due to the complexity of selecting drug combinations and the minimal training data publicly available, studies have typically been limited toward monotherapy repurposing from a variety of angles—often involving artificial intelligence (AI) techniques to provide recommendations.9 The dearth of drug combination datasets is due to the large combinatorial space of possible experiments available—ultimately limiting the quality of drug synergy predictions. Moreover, databases of drug combinations are biased toward suspected synergistic agents, and thus making predictions outside the scope of the training dataset can be challenging.

where I(·)=1−V(·) is the experimentally measured growth inhibition induced by drug d1, d2, or both together at the associated doses. Given a dose-response matrix for the two drugs, a global synergy score can be obtained through a pooling strategy. In our case, we take the maximum value, i.e.,

Due to the operational complexities in prospectively evaluating performance in the personalized framework, we focus on the preclinical framework for experimental proof of concept and demonstration of the RECOVER system. In Figure S1H, we report key aspects of our prospective validation and how it compares with the ones performed in other published works. We note that other works focused on generalizing to a new cell line and/or combinations of drugs both seen during training. Our prospective validation focuses on testing the ability of RECOVER to generalize to combinations involving one drug seen during training and one unseen drug, which is a harder task. In addition, validation involves, for the first time, repeated experimentation via an integrated wet-lab/dry-lab system.

We investigate whether RECOVER can generalize beyond the training (and validation) set in various ways: (Figure 3Ai.) what is the performance on test cases drawn from the same distribution as the training set? Can RECOVER generalize when (Figure 3Aii.) one of the drugs is unseen (during training) or (Figure 3Aiii.) when both of the drugs are unseen? These tasks are illustrated graphically in Figure 3A. For each task, we benchmark against several alternative models along with RECOVER, including a linear support vector machine (SVM), Boosting Trees, and DeepSynergy.20 In addition, we evaluate a version of RECOVER without the invariance module and another version for which the identities of the drugs (as well as cell lines) have been shuffled (see model development and evaluation in the method details for further information on models and hyperparameter optimization procedures). Through understanding the capability of RECOVER to generalize, we can design prospective experiments with a greater confidence of success.

(A) Overview of the different tasks on which RECOVER has been evaluated in preparation for the prospective evaluation within the preclinical framework. Each task corresponds to a different way to split the training, validation, and test sets and aims at evaluating a specific generalization ability of the model. (i.) Default. Combinations are split randomly into training/validation/test (70%/20%/10%). Only the MCF7 cell line is used. (ii.) One unseen drug. 30% of available drugs are excluded from the training and validation sets. The test set consists of combinations between a drug seen during training and an unseen drug. Combinations among seen drugs are split into training and validation (80%/20%). Only the MCF7 cell line is used. (iii.) Two unseen drugs. Similar to task (ii.), but the test set consists of combinations of two unseen drugs.

We note that our benchmarking justifies various aspects of our deep learning architecture: the RECOVER permutation invariance module can provide improvement in performance across some scenarios; moreover, RECOVER (shuffled labels) fails compared with other methods on task (ii.) in Figure 3A with one unseen drug and is at the level of randomness on task (iii.) in Figure 3A with two unseen drugs. In these cases, we demonstrate that drug structure is actually leveraged by the model in order to generalize (to some extent) to unseen drugs. However, RECOVER (shuffled labels) performs well compared with other models on the default task; thus, merely knowing the identity of the drugs is sufficient when both drugs have been seen in other combinations.

From the above results, we can recommend that any prospective experiments should require that one of the two drugs in the combination have been seen in some context before (see task iii. in Figure 3A). Due to the severe batch experiments between studies in the public domain, as shown in Figure S1F, models fail to generalize to data coming from a different study, as shown in Figure S2B (study transfer task). As such, should we want to utilize publicly available resources, we will have to incorporate such data intelligently. To this end, we investigated using transfer learning, wherein one trains a model on a large dataset (known as pretraining) and thereafter refines the model on a smaller dataset (known as fine-tuning)—typically with some aspect of the task or the data changed between the two instances. We show that this is possible and beneficial (compared to not leveraging existing data) in an SMO setting between the O’Neil et al.31 and NCI-ALMANAC studies (see Figure S4E). Remarkably, even with minimal correlation between studies, we are able to observe the benefits of transfer learning in this scenario. These findings suggest that we use transfer learning within prospective experiments.

From the in silico results, we now test RECOVER prospectively using a cancer cell model, leveraging publicly available data for pretraining. Using the insights from retrospective testing of RECOVER informs the design of future experiments, the queriable space of drug combinations was designed to include drug pairs where only one compound was already seen by the model during pretraining—with a second compound not seen before. For details about the model used to generate recommendations, see recommendation generation in the method details. The MCF7 cell line was used to generate 6×6 dose-response matrices (see experimental protocol for details).

Calibration. The initial round of experiments was performed to supplement publicly available data with 20 randomly selected unseen drug combinations. Furthermore, we confirmed the previous in silico result that we could not predict synergy scores (prior to transfer learning adaptation) through selecting 5 highly synergistic combinations selected by RECOVER. In addition, 5 more drug combinations were selected by a graph neural network (GNN) model in the style of Zitnik et al.18 that we did not develop further due to the computational overhead. It was also specified that each drug should appear in, at most, a single drug combination queried.

Diversity. Thereafter, drug combinations are selected using model predictions in conjunction with the upper confidence bound (UCB) acquisition function. To ensure that we quickly observe all single drugs at least once (as we showed that the model cannot generalize well to combinations involving unseen drugs), we select our batch of experiments as follows. First, we rank combinations according to their acquisition function score. We then find the first combination that involves a drug that has not yet been used (or that is involved in one of the combinations from the current batch) and add it to the batch. We repeat this until we have 30 combinations in the batch.

SMO search. RECOVER is now free to select any drug pairs of interest for testing, with the requirement that any single drug may be selected no more than 5 times (to avoid oversampling and depletion of chemical stock). Three such rounds have been performed in this manner.

All combinations queried throughout the five rounds, and their corresponding synergy scores, are provided in Table S1. We notice that specific drugs tend to appear in several of the combinations recommended by RECOVER. Consistent with the literature, we observe that some compounds appear more often than others within synergistic combinations,33 a pattern that can also be observed within the NCI-ALMANAC study (see Figure S1C). However, this does not make the identification of synergistic combinations a trivial problem: even drugs that lead to the highest number of synergistic combinations are non-synergistic most of the time. No single drug within the NCI-ALMANAC study has a synergy score >40 more than 10% of the time (or 12% when considering only the MCF7 cell line data within the NCI-ALMANAC study; see Figure S1G). In comparison, our last two rounds of in vitro experiments yielded 20%–30% of combinations with a synergy >40 (see Figure 4C), while the model had only observed less than 5% of the search space.

This increase in performance and in the synergy of queried combinations from one round to the next demonstrated in Figure 4C is expected and can be attributed to two factors. First, we needed to adapt the model to predict in a new experimental setting. From the study transfer task in Figure S2A, we know that this would otherwise be an impossible task and thus motivates the calibration round. After the calibration round, one expects that the systematic biases learned by the model during pretraining are minimized. At this point, the model is in a scenario akin to task (ii.) in Figure 3A. Second, we can improve performance further by enforcing that (almost) all drugs have been evaluated at some point, which subsequently motivated the diversity round. Thereafter, the model is free to optimize during the SMO rounds to the extent that it is able to, leveraging model predictions and model uncertainties. In fact, due to activity cliff effects,34 there are likely fundamental limits on quantifying the relationship between model uncertainty and model error; in Figures S4B and S4C, we perform a preliminary investigation of these relationships. From our prospective use of RECOVER, we not only discover highly synergistic drug combinations but also demonstrate that high predictive power is not strictly necessary to identify synergistic drug combinations.

In Data S1, we provide detailed information on our experimental results using the Combenefit package35 (including single-agent dose-response curves, combination dose-response surfaces, and synergy levels) for the 14 most synergistic drug combinations (from the ∼150 tested), with alfacalcidol and crizotinib achieving a max Bliss score above 90. Of note, we rapidly discover drug combinations with similar mechanisms and efficacy to those already in clinical trials. Namely, within the first SMO search round we found (1) alisertib and pazopanib and (2) flumatinib and mitoxantrone. The concentration intervals for the drugs used in both drug combinations that show synergy are consistent with therapeutically relevant plasma concentrations36,37 or as observed in in vivo animal experiments (flumatinib).38

RECOVER drug embeddings capture both structural and biological information. To get a better insight into the drug embeddings learned by RECOVER, we report uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualizations of the drug embeddings generated by the single-drug module in Figure 5. The color of each point is chosen by applying principal-component analysis (PCA) to the binary matrix of drug-targets and scaling the first 3 dimensions into an RGB triplet; high transparency indicates drugs with a PCA target profile close to the average PCA target profile (calculated over all drugs). In short, the position of the points indicates what RECOVER has learned about the drugs, and the color represents information known about drug mechanisms from other databases not used in the training procedure.

Drug combinations can achieve benefits unattainable by mono-therapies and are routinely investigated within clinical trials (e.g., PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors combined with other agents39) and utilized within clinical practice (e.g., antiretroviral treatment of HIV where between 3 and 4 agents may be used40). To this end, we have presented the SMO toolbox RECOVER for drug combination identification. We have demonstrated its ability to generalize to combinations involving one unseen drug, and crucially, we have shown the benefit of repeated experimentation via an integrated wet-lab/dry-lab system. We showcase a general methodology, consisting of careful analysis of the properties of our ML pipeline—such as its out-of-distribution generalization capacities—to help us design key aspects of our prospective experiments, to eventually ensure a smooth and successful interaction between the SMO pipeline and the wet lab. Highly synergistic drug combinations have been identified, and the resulting learned embeddings appear to capture both structural and biological information. RECOVER can quickly (in our prospective experiments: <5% of the total search space evaluated) identify patterns in the drug-drug landscape of synergies, in order to provide recommendations significantly enriched for synergism and alleviate the need for exhaustive studies. We provide commentary on key aspects on our approach covering datasets, computational methodology, wet-lab techniques, and evaluation metrics.

Our model can be decomposed into two modules. First, a single drug module, E, which produces representations (or embeddings) for the drugs based on their chemical structure information. The embeddings from a pair of drugs are used as input to the combination module P, which directly estimates the synergy score; see Figure S4A.

The single drug module can be written as a function E:D→RkD where kD corresponds to the dimension of the output vector representation (or embedding) of each drug. Our single drug module is a simple multi-layer perceptron (MLP) that takes raw features of drugs as input and outputs an updated vector representation; this MLP can be conditioned on cell line (described below).

Compounds were plated as a 6 × 6 dose-response combination matrix in natural 384 well plates (Greiner), in a serial 1:3 dilutions of each agent (5 concentrations) and only DMSO as the lowest concentration. We used a combination plate layout where six compound pairs could be accommodated on one 384 well plate. A set of control wells with DMSO was included on all plates as negative control. To ensure reproducibility and comparability with the subsequent combination studies, the IC50 of Doxorubicin was used as reference in a 6-point dose response format in each plate as positive (total killing) control. In addition, alfacalcidol and erlotinib were evaluated in multiple rounds (and excluded from our analysis) to ensure consistency in max Bliss synergy scores.

Cells were seeded in white 384-well plates (Greiner) at 1000 cells/well in 50 μL of media using a multidrop dispenser and allowed to attach for 2 h. Compounds from pre-plated matrix plates were transferred to each well using a 100 nL head affixed to an Agilent Bravo automated liquid handling platform, and plates were incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2 for an additional 72 h. To measure the cell viability, CellTiter-Glo reagent (diluted 1:6 in water, Promega) was dispensed into the wells (30 μL), incubated for 3 min, and luminescence was read on a Envision plate reader (PerkinElmer). Final DMSO concentration in assay wells was 0.2%. The assay was performed with 3 biological replicates.

In each case, we report the single agent dose-response curves (with EC 95/EC50 values estimated via Combenefit), as well as the combination dose-response data, both in matrix format and visualized as a surface. We also report the synergy levels in matrix format and projected on the combination dose-response surface, according to three different synergy models: HSA, Bliss and Loewe. Statistical significance (one sample t test) is computed and reported elementwise (∗ p<5x10−2, ∗∗ p<10−3, ∗∗∗ p<10−4; the number of replicates (N) is shown on the top left corner of the matrix display). Note that the colormap only accounts for statistically significant values (p<5×10−2).

For reference, we also report single agent dose-response viability curves before normalization in Figure S3B. Finally, we report the average and maximum synergy of the 14 combinations, for each of the three models (HSA, Bliss and Loewe) in Figure S3C. Some drugs are over-represented and appear in several of these 14 top scoring combinations. The over-representation of some drugs among highly synergistic combinations is a well known phenomenon,33 and illustrated in Figure S1C.

Output dimension of the single drug MLP: [16, 32, 64, 128, 256]

Dimension(s) of the hidden layer(s) of the single drug MLP: [[512], [256], [1024], [2048], [4096], [1024, 1024], [1024, 1024, 1024], [1024, 512], [1024, 512, 256]]

Finally, we evaluate two variants of RECOVER. In RECOVER (no invariance), the two drug embeddings (outputs of the single drug MLP) are concatenated and directly fed into the combination MLP, instead of first being fed into the invariance module. In RECOVER (shuffled labels), prior to training, drug features are randomly permuted such that each drug gets represented by the features of another drug. A similar procedure is applied to cell line features when they are used, c.f. tasks (iv.) to (vi.).

We will now briefly comment the results of the benchmarking study. RECOVER outperforms baseline models in terms of R2 and Spearman correlation metrics on the Default task (i.). RECOVER (shuffled labels) performs well compared to other models on the default task, multi cell line task, cell line transfer task and study transfer task. In these cases, the information contained in drug fingerprints and cell line features only provides a limited gain in performance, thus merely knowing the identity of the drugs is sufficient. This is further confirmed by our gradual randomization study, as well as our feature importance study wherein drug structure information only provided a minimal increase in performance on the default task.

We observe that there is some local consistency in the values of model uncertainty, suggesting that the model is confident in some regions of chemical space, and less confident in other regions of the chemical space. Moreover, we observe columns and rows of high uncertainty, meaning that the model is less confident about specific drugs (regardless of the other drug found in the combination). On average, uncertainty is lowest on the training-validation set, and highest on combinations where neither of the drugs have been seen, c.f. marginal distributions of log-uncertainties in Figure S4C (top). Moreover, large model errors seem to preferentially occur in regions of high uncertainty – as shown in Figure S4C. Most importantly, large errors never occur when model is confident (low uncertainty), c.f. absence of points in the upper left part of Figure S4C. Furthermore, logged model errors and logged uncertainties are weakly positively correlated (0.22 on the Training+Validation split, 0.29 on the One unseen drug split, and 0.14 on the Two unseen drugs split).

In the following, uncertainty was directly estimated using a DEUP-style uncertainty predictor, and the task is the prediction of the average Bliss synergy score (instead of maximum Bliss), which corresponds to the average over the dose-response matrix of the concentration specific Bliss scores. In the following, 5 combinations were acquired at a time, instead of 30.

While the out-of-distribution analysis presented in Figure S2C showed that RECOVER does not generalize well to new experimental settings without adaptation, these experiments demonstrate, quite remarkably, that some latent knowledge can still be transferred from one experimental setting to another, resulting in increased performance in the latter setting.

In Data S1, we report the synergy levels in matrix format and projected on the combination dose-response surface, according to three different synergy models: HSA, Bliss and Loewe. Statistical significance (one sample t test) is computed and reported elementwise (∗ p<5×10−2, ∗∗ p<10−3, ∗∗∗ p<10−4; the number of replicates (N) is shown on the top left corner of the matrix display). Note that the colormap only accounts for statistically significant values (p<5×10−2).